      United States Department of Agriculture USDA LOGO Forest Service  August 2015 http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gifVolume III Final Environmental Impact Statement Appendices J-R Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Richfield Ranger District, Fishlake National Forest Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah  Legal Description: Multiple sections in Ranges 1, 2, 2 ., and 3 West and in Townships 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29 South                                              The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410, or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.  Printed on recycled paper – August 2015 Table of Contents Appendix J – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Hydrology/Soils Specialist Report Appendix K – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Inventoried Roadless & Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas Specialist Report (Christensen 2015a) Appendix L – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resources Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) Appendix M – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Recreation Specialist Report (Christensen 2015b) Appendix N – Vegetation and Climate Change Specialist Report (Holsclaw 2015) Appendix O – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Visual Quality Specialist Report (Christensen 2015c) Appendix P – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Wildlife Specialist Report (Rasmussen 2015) Appendix Q – Wildlife Biological Assessment and Evaluation Appendix R – Aquatics Biological Assessment and Evaluation  Appendix J – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Hydrology/Soils Specialist Report (Solt 2015)   Prepared by:  Adam Solt Fishlake Forest Hydrologist  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 17, 2015   Project Area Map  Proposed Action  The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues (EIS Chapter 1), and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments. Please see Chapter 2 for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative (EIS, Chapter 2).  Addressing the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression on Monroe Mountain is critical to the long-term restoration of aspen ecosystems. The average fire return intervals for each of the vegetation cover types occurring on Monroe Mountain can be found in Chapter 1 in the EIS This table also shows that the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (Alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch at Diameter Breast Height (DBH), using group and singletree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (Alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years. This number is well within the recommended range of area to treat within a 5-year period of 5,000 to 24,000 acres (Chapter 1 of EIS).  Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see Alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the Alternative (see Chapter 2 for specific road locations, mileage, and specifications). In addition, temporary fencing would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (see Chapter 2 for fencing locations, mileage, and specifications)  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management). See Chapter 2 for a detailed description of the District’s proposal to address overbrowsing of aspen. Fire Severity Definitions Low soil burn severity: Surface organic layers are not completely consumed and are still recognizable. Structural aggregate stability is not changed from its unburned condition, and roots are generally unchanged because the heat pulse below the soil surface was not great enough to consume or char any underlying organics. The ground surface, including any exposed mineral soil, may appear brown or black (lightly charred), and the canopy and understory vegetation will likely appear “green.”  Moderate soil burn severity: Up to 80 percent of the pre-fire ground cover (litter and ground fuels) may be consumed but generally not all of it. Fine roots (approximately 0.1 inch in diameter) may be scorched but are rarely completely consumed over much of the area. The color of the ash on the surface is generally blackened with possible gray patches. There may be potential for recruitment of effective ground cover from scorched needles or leaves remaining in the canopy that will soon fall to the ground. The prevailing color of the site is often “brown” due to canopy needle and other vegetation scorch. Soil structure is generally unchanged.  High soil burn severity: all or nearly all of the pre-fire ground cover and surface organic matter (litter, duff, and fine roots) is generally consumed, and charring may be visible on larger roots. The prevailing color or the site is often “black” due to extensive charring. Bare soil or ash is exposed and susceptible to erosion, and aggregate structure may be less stable. White or gray ash (up to several inches in depth) indicates that considerable ground cover or fuels were consumed. Sometimes very large tree roots (greater than 3 inches in diameter) are entirely burned extending from a charred stump hold. Soil is often gray, orange, or reddish at the ground surface where large fuels were concentrated and consumed.  Proposed Action and alternatives Introduction This section describes the proposed action and alternatives, and compares the alternatives considered for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project. It includes a description of each alternative considered. This section also presents the alternatives in comparative form, sharply defining the differences between each alternative and providing a clear basis for choice among options by the decision maker and the public. Some of the information used to compare the alternatives is based upon the design of the alternative and some of the information is based upon the environmental, social, and economic effects of implementing each alternative. Proposed Action Proposed Mechanical Treatments Seral and Stable Aspen Stands There are two mechanical treatment options being considered in this analysis for seral and stable aspen dominated stands:  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained. In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer. Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods There are also two mechanical treatments options being considered in this analysis for spruce/fir and mixed dominated conifer stands: 1. This option would occur throughout the project area. a) If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest1). b) If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest2). c) In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 903, the remaining live trees 1 Salvage harvest – The removal of dead trees, damaged trees, or dying trees resulting from injurious agents other than competition (Helms 1998). 2 Sanitation harvest – The removal of trees to improve stand health by stopping or reducing the actual or anticipated spread of insects and disease (Helms 1998). 3 A BA of 90 helps reduce fuel loads to facilitate prescribed burning. Disturbance from lowering the BA to 90 is expected to help stimulate new aspen growth while maintaining a spruce and conifer presence. A BA of 90 is also expected to reduce the probability of continued Spruce beetle infestation (Hebertson 2013) and is expected to allow for trees to grow bigger. would be thinned using uneven- aged management4 to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d) If no beetle killed or infested trees are present initially, trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH. In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in Option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands. 4 Uneven-aged management – a planning sequence of treatments designed to maintain and regenerate a stand with three or more age classes (Helms 1998). This is opposed to even-aged management that describes a stand as trees composed of a single age class.  Table 1. Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 3,146 Stable Aspen 4,025 Spruce/Fir 918 Mixed Conifer 97 Total 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 6,422 Stable Aspen 4,780 Spruce/Fir 2,355 Mixed Conifer 91 Total 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 9,492 Stable Aspen 6,130 Spruce/Fir 4,113 Mixed Conifer 102 Total 19,837 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 6,736 Stable Aspen 5,340 Spruce/Fir 2,905 Mixed Conifer 92 Total 15,073 Table 2. Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 2,349 797 3,146 Stable Aspen 3,643 382 4,025 Spruce/Fir 472 446 918 Mixed Conifer 89 8 97 Total 6,553 1,633 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 3,111 3,311 6,422 Stable Aspen 3,965 815 4,780 Spruce/Fir 835 1,520 2,355 Mixed Conifer 90 1 91 Total 8,001 5,647 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 3,991 5,501 9,492 Stable Aspen 4,196 1,934 6,130 Spruce/Fir 1,186 2,927 4,113 Mixed Conifer 91 11 102 Total 9,464 10,373 19,837 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 2,547 4,189 6,736 Stable Aspen 3,830 1,510 5,340 Spruce/Fir 984 1,921 2,905 Mixed Conifer 91 1 92 Total 7,452 7,621 15,073      Proposed Prescribed Fire Treatments Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. To maintain LRMP compliance, prescribed fire would occur when 60 percent of the area would be expected to burn (Table 3).  Table 3. Proposed prescribed fire treatments.  Existing Vegetation Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 7,991 4,795 Spruce-Fir 5,658 3,395 Mixed Conifer 4,183 2,510 Total 32,991 19,795 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 14,318 8,591 Stable Aspen 7,861 4,716 Spruce-Fir 4,988 2,993 Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Total 31,357 18,814 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,693 4,016 Spruce-Fir 3,802 2,281 Mixed Conifer 4,178 2,507 Total 27,436 16,462 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 11,676 7,006 Stable Aspen 6,777 4,066 Spruce-Fir 3,810 2,286 Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Total 26,453 15,872     Design Criteria and Mitigation Measures –See Chapter 2 of the EIS for the list of design Criteria and mitigation measures Mechanical Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning, and Prescribed Fire Treatments • All applicable LRMP standards and guidelines would be applied and incorporated into all the action alternatives. • Treated areas would be rested from livestock grazing for at least two growing seasons post implementation, and possibly three to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts. • Invasive and noxious weeds are not known to occur in the proposed treatment areas; however, treatment areas would be monitored post-implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. • Equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. • Equipment would be cleaned and dried before moving from one water source to another to prevent the spread of aquatic invasive species (AIS). If equipment cannot be completely dried, equipment would be decontaminated following the 2014 Region 4 Fire AIS guidelines (USFS 2014a). • Treatments would target upland, non-riparian areas first. No more than 15 percent of the upland areas within a hydrologic unit code (HUC) 6 would be treated in any one year. After the upland areas have been treated (15 percent) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function, additional upland areas (15 percent) in the same HUC 6 could occur. • After the upland areas have been treated and have recovered [comparable] watershed function and aspen restocking (1,000 aspen saplings per acre) are being achieved, then the aspen or conifer in riparian areas could be treated. • No more than 5 to 10 percent of the riparian areas within a HUC 6 would be treated in any one year. After the riparian areas have been treated (5 to 10 percent) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function, additional riparian areas (5 to 10 percent) in the same HUC 6 could occur. • Following treatments, if determined necessary by the Forest’s fish biologist, hydrologist, or soil scientist, wood chips, slash, mulch, straw, and/or silt fences could be installed to help minimize impacts from soil erosion. • A Spill Prevention Control and Containment Plan would be compiled and in place prior to project implementation. • Areas for fuel storage, refueling, servicing, and parking of equipment would occur outside riparian areas in designated locations. • Significant historical and cultural sites identified by the Forest archaeologist would be protected from prescribed fire treatments by the construction of a control line observing a 100-foot buffer from the site. These sites would also be protected from mechanical treatments by observing the same 100-foot buffer from the site. • To provide for firefighter and public safety, some roads and dispersed camping areas may be temporarily closed during prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatment implementation. objects were discovered during implementation they would be immediately reported as required by law. • If project activities inadvertently discover habitation sites, plant gathering areas, human remains, and objects of cultural patrimony, the Historic Preservation Department – Traditional Culture Program would be notified respectively in accordance with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. Mechanical Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning • Ground based mechanical treatments would only occur on slopes less than 40 percent. • Within riparian areas, equipment operations would occur when soils are dry, frozen or snow levels are sufficient to prevent wheels or tracks from coming in contact with soil. • Cutting methods would include, but are not limited to, feller bunchers, skid-steers attached with saws, and/or hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. • Merchantable wood and biomass removal methods to the nearest road would include, but are not limited to, skid-steers, skidders, horses, helicopters, and/or cables. The most likely areas for helicopter use would be near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake. • Within riparian areas, low ground pressure equipment (i.e. skid-steers) would be used where possible to help minimize soil impacts. • Trees located on rocky ridges, or in other areas that are not as susceptible to fire would not be cut. • A combination of skid trails, temporary roads, and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments that occur outside IRAs. Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. • Inside the IRAs, skid trails and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments. No temporary roads would be constructed inside the IRAs. For areas that cannot be accessed via existing roads, cross-country travel would be allowed to facilitate access to specific stands. • No temporary roads would be constructed in Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs. • No skid trails or landings would be constructed inside riparian areas. • Efforts would be made to cut trees as close to the ground as possible. • Efforts would be made to have merchantable trees removed from Monroe Mountain. • Non-merchantable trees and slash would be consolidated and either piled and burned, or hauled off-site. Non-merchantable trees could also be made available for firewood cutting. • Inside IRAs, if existing roads and skid trails do not allow for the removal of biomass, trees and slash may be consolidated, piled, and burned on-site. • No mechanical treatments using feller bunchers or skid-steers would occur in the stable aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. These areas may still be mechanically treated with hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. • Jack-strawing on a small scale, in site-specific areas to help impede ungulate access may occur.  Prescribed Fire Treatments  • Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. • No direct fire ignitions would occur in the stable aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. • No direct fire ignitions would occur in riparian areas on side slopes greater than 40 percent. On side slopes less than 40 percent in riparian areas, prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. Riparian areas would be ignited on the outside edge so that the prescribed fire could back towards the interior of the riparian area. • Pile burning would be limited in riparian areas. No pile burning would occur within a 100 feet of water. Pile burning that does occur within riparian areas would occur when fuel moisture levels are sufficient to limit creep. • Within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. • For prescribed fire implementation, if water needs to be drafted, all water intakes would be equipped with a screen to prevent intake of fish and amphibian species. Drafting sites would be approved by the Forest’s fish biologist prior to use. • Prior to ignition, control lines may need to be constructed around the perimeter of the prescribed fire treatment areas. • Control lines would be constructed with chainsaws, hand tools, and/or skid-steer equipment attached with a fecon head, Marshall saw and/or grapple hooks to primarily remove smaller diameter trees averaging less than 8 inch DBH, limb larger diameter trees, remove 1000 hour fuels, and dig handline. Trees larger than 8 inch DBH that may pose a threat to the effectiveness of the control lines would also be removed. • Efforts would be made to cut trees as close to the ground as possible. • Control lines would be feathered on the edges. Depending on slope, topography, and fuel loading, control lines may vary in width. • Control lines would be reclaimed upon completion of the prescribed fire treatments. • Prescribed fires would comply with the Utah State air quality standards. Prior to prescribed fire implementation, the District would obtain approval from Utah Smoke Management. • Interested parties would be notified prior to implementing any prescribed burning. • No broadcast prescribed burning would occur in Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs. Burning in PFAs or NAs would be limited to pile burning of slash material. • No direct fire ignitions would occur during the nesting season (usually between May 15 and August 1) in areas where cavity nesting birds such as three-toed woodpeckers (Picoides tridactylus) are found. • No fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur to preserve Flammulated owl (Otus flammeolus) habitat and populations on Monroe Mountain. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15 and after August 1) would be allowed.  Boreal Toad Specific Design Features  Definition: Boreal toad mapped habitat is defined as the area within 328 feet from either side of streams, or from the high water lines of ponds, lakes, and wetlands, that are known to be occupied by boreal toad, have been occupied by boreal toad, or are adjacent to occupied habitat and suitable for use by boreal toad and the area within 984 feet of documented breeding sites. • Utilize boreal toad Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) of 328 feet from each side of streams, or from the high water lines of ponds, lakes, and wetlands, as buffers for vegetation treatments. Utilize RHCAs of 984 feet from known boreal toad breeding ponds. • In order to protect boreal toads and hibernacula from being crushed, no ground-based mechanized harvesting equipment would be permitted within the RHCAs. • Within the RHCAs, vegetation treatments would be limited to hand treatments, horse, or helicopter thinning up to 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands or up to 328 feet from the known boreal toad breading ponds. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within 100 feet of perennial streams or within 328 feet of breeding ponds, lakes, or other sites unless such treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. o *Any exceptions to this design feature would be for the purpose of improving boreal toad habitat or reducing fire risk to boreal toad habitat, and would be approved by the Forest fisheries biologist. Design feature exceptions would be documented with a map of the area to be treated, any treatment requirements (i.e. timing, method to be used, etc.), and any needed implementation and/or posttreatment monitoring prior to treatment. A summary of monitoring results would be included on the documentation sheet post-treatment. See Appendix M in the Aquatics Specialist Report. • Within the RHCAs it is allowable to leave some slash scattered and some slash piles unburned within riparian habitat to create micro habitat for boreal toads. No pile or slash burning would occur within 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands or breeding sites edge. Within the remainder of the RHCAs, pile or slash burning would only occur on slopes and upland soils and habitats (i.e. outside of deep riparian soils and/or true riparian vegetation) during the boreal toad dormant season (October 1 through April 15) unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • Within the RHCAs, snags (200 per 100 acres in aspen, 300 per 100 acres in mixed conifer spruce/fir, and large downed logs (50 per 10 acres; a minimum of 15 tons per acre) would be retained as cover for toads. • Within the RHCAs, vegetation thinning treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would target less than 60 percent of the stands if treated for complete conifer removal (aspen cover type) or thinning to BA 90 (spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types); or would target less than 80 percent of aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer stands if treated by thinning conifer from below up to 8 inch DBH. • If any unmapped perennial streams, seeps, or other water sources in boreal toad supporting habitat are encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 100-foot buffer. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless these treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • If any boreal toad hibernacula are encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 328-foot buffer. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. • Temporary roads within the RHCAs would have toad passage friendly culverts installed where culverts are needed (buried culverts or bottomless arched structures) for the duration of the project. • Dipping or drafting water for fire activities from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show a change in water levels from the use would be avoided, except for emergencies. • Monitoring of boreal toad populations (in addition to current levels by the UDWR would be implemented to document project effects and to help plan future vegetation management projects in boreal toad habitat. This would include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations. See Appendix J in the Aquatic Specialist Report. • Within the RHCAs, prescribed burning would occur when generally low to moderate fire intensity and severities would be expected. Prescribed fire personnel would attempt to implement prescribed burning during the boreal toad dormant season (1 October through April 15). • No direct fire ignitions would occur within 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands, and 328 feet from boreal toad hibernacula or breeding ponds, lakes, and other breeding sites unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. Fire ignitions could occur outside these buffers and allowed to back into these areas. • Temporary roads within RHCAs would not be constructed or used for hauling logs until after October 1 of the calendar year, unless surveys and field inspection determine that toads are not likely to be impacted. • For the 7th field HUCS (as delineated for the aquatics CEA): Manning Cr. – Manning Res., Manning Cr. – Barney Lake, Thompson Cr. - Anabella Res, and Water Cr. - Big Lake – vegetation treatments would be limited to 20 percent of the HUC area until watershed function is recovered [comparable] or would be limited to treatments that keep a current Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling of the HUC at or under the recommended Threshold of Concern (TOC) of 10. • Prior to beginning implementation within a HUC6 watershed, the Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling would be repeated for that HUC to incorporate the recovery period (i.e. years from this analysis to the implementation start date) for past projects, allow inclusion of new projects that were previously authorized but not yet carried out or completed during this planning process, and the proposed work. This would help incorporate effects from the currently authorized but not yet implemented or completed work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain/North Clover projects. If the new ERA modeling shows the proposed work would push the HUC over the suggested TOC, multiple entries would occur to reduce cumulative effects to the subwatershed. • The District would coordinate project treatments in watersheds containing Bonneville cutthroat trout or boreal toads with the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources southern region fisheries/toads personnel. Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails Temporary roads would feature a finished road width of approximately 15 feet and may include turnouts at regular intervals. Road cut slopes would be constructed at a 1:1 vertical-to-horizontal ration and fill slopes at a 1:1.5 ratio. Road surfaces would be outsloped at a 3 to 5 percent slope. The primary road drainage feature would be drain drips, which shall be constructed at regular intervals. Culverts would be installed at any proposed stream crossings.  Upon project completion, temporary roads would be reclaimed. Reclaiming efforts would adhere to standard engineering best management practices and would be accomplished by ripping the roadbed and/or scarifying (scratching) the road surface with mechanical equipment. Litter and debris that is available in the area (primarily slash and large rocks) would be scattered over the ripped or scarified road surface and placed at or near the temporary road origins in order to deter traffic. Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Existing Roads and Skid Trails within Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) for All Action Alternatives • Skid trails and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments. No temporary roads would be constructed inside the IRAs. For areas that cannot be accessed via existing roads, cross-country travel would be allowed to facilitate access to specific stands. • If existing roads and skid trails do not allow for the removal of biomass, trees and slash may be consolidated, piled, and burned on-site.  Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails outside Inventoried Roadless Areas for All Action Alternatives • A combination of skid trails, temporary roads, and existing roads would be used to facilitate mechanical treatments. Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of mechanical treatments. Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Roads and Skid Trails Whether they are inside or outside of Inventoried Roadless Areas • No temporary roads would be constructed in Northern goshawk NAs or PFAs. • No skid trails or landings would be constructed inside riparian areas. • To provide for firefighter and public safety, some roads and dispersed camping areas may be temporarily closed during prescribed fire and mechanical treatment implementation. Temporary closures would be determined by implementation personnel and would be based on the hazards present at the time of implementation.  Temporary Fencing around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (Figure 1) Regardless of which alternative is selected, treatment areas adjacent to Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake would be fenced to exclude both wildlife and livestock browsing. With fencing, the amount of time needed to acquire a minimum of 1,000 aspen saplings per acre is expected to be quicker. Other vegetation and cover types are also expected to benefit from fencing.  The District is proposing to construct approximately 7.2 miles (633 acres) of temporary fence in the Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake areas. This fence would be approximately 8 feet tall and constructed with net wire, t-post, and wooden post. Maintenance of the temporary fence would occur for 4 to 6 years until the aspen shoots are greater than 6 feet tall, after which the fence would be removed.  AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT The variety of vegetation on Monroe Mountain is reflective of the soils, climatic patterns, disturbance histories, and elevations. The lower and drier slopes are dominated by pinyon and juniper mixed with sagebrush and interspersed with an occasional meadow or riparian zone. Douglas-fir and white fir appear at mid elevations. Higher elevation areas are dominated by aspen mixed with Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir. Other vegetation types occur at different elevations and moisture regimes including mixed conifer and mountain shrubs. Mixed conifer ecosystems offer a variety of green textures and colors based on their species composition.  The current distribution of vegetation on the Mountain is constantly changing. Natural disturbances including fire and insects have affected vegetation composition. Today many of these natural disturbance processes are not functioning as they have in the past. For example, spruce and subalpine fir is encroaching on, and in some cases replacing aspen stands; pinyon and juniper have invaded grass, forb, and sagebrush areas; and sagebrush areas have reduced grass and forb components. C:\Users\asolt\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\ZO3J3A7U\Monroe_EIS_Proposed_Fencing_Map.jpgFigure 1: Proposed fencing near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake    Water is especially important in the semi-arid climate of the region. The mountains and plateaus of the Forests are important for capturing, storing, and releasing water to the surrounding valleys. Ecological resources such as riparian and wetland areas, streams, aquatic species, wildlife, and vegetation are all dependent on these critical water resources. In addition, many local communities obtain culinary and agricultural water from sources located and developed within or near the Forests’ boundaries. See Riparian Zones and Wetlands Areas containing hydric soils display near the end of this report.  Average annual precipitation ranges from 10 inches in the lower elevations to over 32 inches in the higher mountain ranges. The majority of this precipitation occurs in the winter and spring months primarily as snow. During this time, moisture is associated with frontal systems from the Pacific Ocean. In the mid to late summer month monsoonal air masses from the Gulf of California and the Gulf of Mexico can cause intense summer thunderstorms. These monsoonal storms can create hazardous flash floods in canyons, and can have impacts to various resources. Peak stream flows generally occur in the spring or early summer as a result of melting snowpack, but high flows can also be produced by localized summer thunderstorms.  Geographically, Monroe Mountain is part of the area that straddles the divide between the Great Basin and the Colorado Plateau. This transition zone is comprised of a mix of high mountain ranges and plateau lands of which Monroe Mountain is one, and is sometimes referred to as the Utah High Plateaus. The Sevier River watershed first trends north to south (Otter Creek on the Eastside of the Mountain) and then south to north on the Westside of Monroe Mountain, skirting and cutting a wide valley swath below the Forest. Elevations vary from approximately 5,400 feet near Monroe to 11,227 feet at Monroe Peak. Other Elevations of prominent Peaks going from North to South on Monroe Mountain include Signal Peak at 11,126, Monument Peak at 11,047, Marysvale Peak at 10,761, Bean Hill at 10,055, Langdan Mountain at 10,323, and Maelstrom Peak at 9,793 feet in elevation.  Monroe Mountain supports a variety of terrestrial and aquatic wildlife species that contribute to ecosystem function in a wide array of habitats and settings. The many lakes, reservoirs, and streams support an active sport fishery. The plateau and high elevation lakes of the Mountain characterize the Forest’s unique geologic features. Many of the rivers and creeks throughout the Mountain provide habitat for trout populations, including Bonneville cutthroat trout are supported in restoring populations from Manning Meadow Reservoir. These waterways also provide excellent, diverse sport-fishing opportunities. In addition to supporting wildlife biodiversity, these water resources provide culinary water to adjacent communities. Monroe Mountain is part of the Sevier River Basin, a closed habitat system draining into the Great Basin. Drinking Water Sources Groundwater in the Forest serves as sources of drinking water for nearby towns and cities. Generally, natural spring sources that have collection systems and areas are used for communities in the communities surrounding the Forest, rather than wells or surface sources such as streams or lakes. The State of Utah has designated protection zones for these sources of drinking water (UDWQ, 2011b).   Groundwater Occurrence, Movement, Development and Use Groundwater in the Project Area is recharged from local precipitation that averages 10 inches per year at low altitudes and up to about 32 inches per year in the mountains at the highest elevations. The precipitation is snow and rain from generally eastward-moving storms during the winter and from thunderstorms associated with northward air movements in late spring and summer (monsoons). Groundwater moves from recharge areas in the mountains and adjacent alluvial slopes toward the valleys. Groundwater is discharged at land surface as springs and creeks. It can also be utilized by plant roots and subsequently transpired to the atmosphere and pumped from wells and springs for water supply use. Groundwater can also migrate into deeper, permeable basin-fill deposits and bedrock through which it can flow into adjacent valleys.  There are numerous springs located throughout the project area. Discharges from these springs are probably associated with permeable bedrock, rock formations on the mountain slopes and in the basin-fill deposits. Most of the springs within and adjacent to the Project Area receive recharge from precipitation that falls within the Project Area and, therefore, have the potential to be impacted by land use activities.  Groundwater in the basin-fill deposits generally flows from the mountain highlands toward the adjacent valleys. Shallow groundwater that flows into a topographically closed basin does not leave the basin and eventually evaporates from the soil surface or is transpired through plants. Some valleys could also receive groundwater inflow from adjacent unclosed basins.  Groundwater within and adjacent to the Project Area is withdrawn for a number of beneficial uses, including drinking water, agriculture (irrigation and stock watering), industry (mining), and wildlife management. Well and spring discharges have a wide range of yields in the vicinity of the Project Area. The communities around the Forest use spring sources and groundwater wells for their drinking water (UDWQ, 2011b). These spring and well sites have Surface Water Protection Plans approved by the State to insure the quality of water needed to meet the required drinking water standards. Many of the spring sources and their associated Source Water Protection Zones are located within the Forest Boundaries. Drinking water yields likely range from a few hundred gallons per minute for smaller springs up to about 2,000 gallons per minute for the largest community well in the area.  In a nutshell, the State of Utah owns all of the water within the State, but does allow people/ communities to use water for approved Beneficial Uses and issues water right certificates to show they approve of the users putting that water to use appropriately by the State Engineer. Typical of high elevation lands, the Forest serve primarily as catchments for recharge zones. Unlike lower elevation valley bottoms, the Forest lands do not contain extensive unconsolidated deposits that support usable aquifers. However, there are consolidated bedrock aquifers at depth within the Forest that can provide usable groundwater. The majority of groundwater basins in the Forest are fully or almost fully appropriated, meaning that future development of groundwater is unlikely or limited.     Aquatic and Riparian Ecosystems This region is characterized by an arid climate, where annual precipitation ranges from less than 10 inches in the valleys to about 32 inches in the highest peaks. In the project area much of this precipitation infiltrates through the soil profile and then into bedrock to become groundwater. Thus, surface water and associated aquatic and riparian ecosystems are extremely limited in extent. Aquatic and riparian ecosystems comprise approximately 1 percent of lands within the Project Area (see Riparian Zones and Wetlands Areas containing hydric soils display near the end of his soils Report). Yet these habitats are important in supporting biodiversity, and they perform critical ecosystem functions in maintaining dependent fish and wildlife populations, filtering and storing runoff and sediment produced by the watershed, and attenuating floods. These habitats are also important focus areas for human uses, such as recreation, livestock grazing, and water diversion/development for agricultural or domestic uses.  Aquatic ecosystems are defined as “environments characterized by the presence of standing or flowing water” (Forest Service Manual 2605). Within the Project Area, aquatic ecosystems are associated with lakes, streams, springs, seeps, and ponds.  Federal agencies are obligated to protect all wetlands and floodplains under EO 11990 (to minimize the destruction, loss, or degradation of wetlands; to preserve and enhance the natural beneficial values of wetlands; and to avoid adverse impacts to wetlands where practicable) and EO 11988 (to avoid adverse impacts associated with the occupancy and modification of floodplains; minimize the impacts of floods on human safety, health, and welfare; and restore and preserve the natural values served by floodplains).  The Fishlake National Forest maintains compliance with Executive Order 11988 in relationship of floodplain management. Most bankfull channels and floodplains on the Forest are only a few feet to up to about 20 feet wide or so. The Fishlake National Forest does not have large rivers like those found elsewhere. The widest the rivers are, including floodplains, is about 50-100 feet.  The Forest Plan states that special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes and other waterbodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet (FLRMP, P. IV-33).  Wetlands protected under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA) must meet the legal definition of a jurisdictional wetland, defined by the presence of three conditions: (1) permanent or seasonal water, (2) hydrophytic (water-loving) vegetation, and (3) soil characteristics influenced by saturated conditions (USACE 1987). Floodplains (lowland areas adjacent to streams or other inland waterways that may be submerged by floodwaters) as well as riparian areas frequently meet these criteria. Wetlands and floodplains occur on the Forest.  Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Riparian areas are defined as a vegetated ecosystem along a water body through which energy, materials, and water pass. Riparian areas characteristically have a high water table and are subject to periodic flooding and influence from the adjacent water body. These systems encompass wetlands, uplands, or some combination of these two landforms. They will not in all cases have all the characteristics necessary for them to be also classified as wetlands. These definitions may vary. See Riparian Zones and Wetlands Areas containing hydric soils display (Figure 2).  Riparian communities occur over a wide range of elevations along perennial and intermittent streams, in meadows, and along seeps and springs. Riparian ecosystems are extremely limited and valuable in the Project Area. In the arid West, the ecological role and importance of these riparian areas is greatly intensified. Riparian areas throughout the project area have been affected in the past. Some of these effects have been negative, including: lowering of water tables, erosion of stream channels, exotic plant encroachment, concentrated runoff and increased sediment from road construction, and changes in vegetation composition.  Level II Riparian Surveys (IRE) reports generally indicate that riparian and wetland ecosystems within the project area are in good and stable condition but have been impacted by current and past disturbance and use.        Figure 2: Riparian Zones and Wetland Areas containing Hydric Soils The functions of wetlands and riparian areas include water quality improvement; stream shading; flood attenuation; shoreline stabilization; ground water exchange; and habitat for aquatic, semiaquatic, terrestrial, migratory, and rare species. Wetlands and riparian areas typically occur as natural buffers between uplands and adjacent water bodies. Loss of these systems allows for a more direct contribution of nonpoint source (NPS) pollutants to receiving waters. The pollutant removal functions associated with wetlands and riparian area vegetation and soils combine the physical process of filtering and the biological processes of nutrient uptake. Riparian systems, particularly in western regions, have been shown to stabilize the recharge of shallow aquifers in a manner that supports streamflow of longer natural duration.  Wetlands and riparian areas can play a critical role in reducing NPS pollution by intercepting surface runoff, subsurface flow, and certain ground water flows. Their role in water quality improvement includes processing, removing, transforming, and storing such pollutants as sediment, nitrogen, phosphorus, and certain heavy metals. Research also shows that riparian areas function to control the release of herbicides into surface waters. Thus, wetlands and riparian areas buffer receiving waters from the effects of pollutants or they prevent the entry of pollutants into receiving waters. It is important to consider that degradation of wetlands and riparian areas can inhibit their ability to treat pollution. Water Quality Water quality in the Forest is influenced by several factors including geology, soils, vegetation, and human activities. Low dissolved oxygen, high phosphorous loads, and sedimentation are the prevailing water quality problems in the Forest. In general, water quality issues on Monroe Mountain are closely related to human activities on soils formed from the volcanic geology parent material that cause surface disturbance such as road use, grazing, and recreational use.  Water quality is assessed in terms of designated beneficial uses as defined by the State of Utah Division of Water Quality (UDWQ). The majority of streams and reservoirs on the Mountain provide water for domestic and agricultural uses, cold-water fisheries, recreation, and wildlife. Maintaining the quality of these waters is becoming increasingly important as the demand for water increases with the growing urban populations next to the Forest. Streams and lakes that the State considers impaired, and thus not able to meet their designated beneficial uses, are reported on the State’s 303(d) list, which is updated every other year. Listed water bodies are then scheduled for TMDL development. The Forest streams and reservoirs shown on the approved 2006 State’s 303(d) list (UDWQ 2006) are discussed below.  The majority of perennial streams and reservoirs on the Fishlake provide for cold water fisheries, recreation, wildlife, and agriculture uses. Maintaining the quality of these waters is becoming increasingly important as the demand for water increases with the growing population next to the Fishlake National Forest. Streams and lakes that the State considers impaired, and thus not able to meet their designated beneficial uses, are reported on the State’s 303(d) lists, which are updated periodically. Listed waterbodies are then scheduled for TMDL development. Approved and other statuses of TMDLs are located on the State of Utah-DEQ website (UDWQ 2011).    Monroe Mountain waterbodies on the approved 2006 303(d) list.  Manning Meadow Reservoir-Dissolved Oxygen and Total Phosphorous for Cold Water Aquatic Use attributed to grazing (very likely recreation, roads and summer homes contributing too). Fishkill has occurred and reservoir is Mesotrophic. This drainage is near the top of the drainage so cumulative impacts occur from localized activities near the streams and the reservoir. Manning Meadow Reservoir, ironically even with fish kills, holds the brood stock population of Bonneville Cutthroat trout population for the State of Utah. It’s a very important Statewide for native Bonneville Cutthroat trout reintroductions around the State.  Lower Box Creek Reservoir-pH for Cold Water Aquatic Use and is Mesotrophic. The Lower Reservoir is a low priority for a TMDL. The source of the pH impairment is listed as unknown but likely is just sediment from all activities within the watershed including recreation, roads and trails, grazing, and fuel treatments and the volcanic geology of the mountain. This drainage is flatter on top, and there is plenty of access across the drainage. There has been ongoing vegetation management within Box Creek reservoir drainage in the last 5 years and some wildfire too. The Box Creek Fuels Reduction Project Hydrology Specialist Report described treatment as: Notice all gross percent of treatment areas are less than or approximately equal to about 1.8% except for Box Creek at the Subwatershed (HUC6) scale that is 9.7% and the total treatment area that is 2.17%. These treatment percentages imply that at these multiple HUC scales that the proposed treatments would not likely lead to negative effects because of the small areas to be treated. There have not been reports of any effects from the treatments or fire within these drainages up to this point in time. The reservoirs likely aided in catching and trapping most fine (clays and silts) to nearly all coarse sediment (sands up to rocks). Water Quality Monitoring The Forest has been actively and cooperatively worked with the State of Utah in sampling water quality across the Forest. We have sampled Koosharem, Greenwich, and Box Creeks on the Eastside of Monroe Mountain, and on the Westside we sampled Monroe, and Manning Creeks. Sampling did overlap as initial Box Creek Project work was being implemented in the Box and Greenwich Creek drainages. One year we did year-long sampling of Manning Meadow Reservoir. Cooperative efforts of the Forest with the State Division of Water Quality includes additional sampling by the State including numerous lake and stream samples across the forest over that same period of time. The Forest additionally collects macro-invertebrate samples within fish bearing streams cooperatively with the Forest Fisheries Biologist. The Forest is actively engaged and is a leader in water quality monitoring and assessments on the Forest to maintain the high quality waters of the Forest and Clean Water Act compliance and will continue to do in regards to activities within the Forest.  The Forest has monitored and assessed water quality cooperatively with the State of Utah to maintain compliance with the Clean Water Act, and will continue to do so in regards to this project to maintain high quality waters of the Forest and compliance with the Clean Water Act. The Forest is actively engaged in improving and restoring watersheds on the Forest. A few Monroe Mountain areas include Manning Meadows, Barney Lake, Greenwich Creek and Lower Box Creek Reservoir.  Geology- Written by Andrew E. Godfrey, Geologist The dark, somber hues of the rocks comprising Monroe Mountain, also known as the Sevier Plateau, stand in stark contrast to the vivid colors of the Colorado Plateau to the east. This does not mean, however, that the plateau has had a bland history. To the contrary, the mountain has been racked by violent eruptions, earthquakes, and giant landslides. Beginning about 25 million years ago the area was a scene of intense, explosive volcanic activity. Within what is now called Monroe Mountain there were two main centers, one located around Signal Peak and the other around Langdon Mountain. Eruptions of these volcanoes were so violent that they created their own weather. Clouds of volcanic dust and gasses rose so high that they condensed, forming their own thunderstorms. The resulting torrential floods washed boulders and other debris down the newly formed sides of the volcanoes. Examples of these flood deposits can be seen along the walls of Pole Canyon. As the eruptions proceeded a tremendous amount of material was removed from the pool of molten lava deep within the earth creating a large void. The overlying rocks subsided into this void much as a piston slides down a cylinder. The resulting depression is called a caldera. Monroe Peak Caldera is tremendous, measuring about 14 miles east-west and 11 miles northsouth, from Poverty Flat on the west to Koosharem on the east, and from Tenderfoot Ridge on the north to Big Flat on the south. This period of violent activity was followed by one of quiet. Erosion reduced the land to an area of low relief where streams slowly meandered. Between the low hills there were swamps and lakes. Gravels and sands were deposited along the stream courses while sands and muds were deposited in the swamps and lakes. This period lasted from about 14 to 7 million years ago and the sediments are known as the Sevier River Formation. About five million years ago the period of quiescence ended. Forces within the earth lifted and bent large blocks. One such block is Monroe Mountain. On the east side, the rocks dip off to the east and are broken by several small faults that drop the east side downward. The west side, however, is bounded by a truly spectacular fault system. Stretching from about Gunnison to the Grand Canyon, this fault system has dropped the west side relative to the high standing east side. In places there is about two miles of displacement between the two sides. All this movement along the fault did not occur at one time. Only about 20 feet or less normally happens during one earthquake. Over several million years, with the earthquakes happening about once every 400 years, the distance built up. As the relief between the mountain block and the surrounding valleys built up, the steep mountain slopes became more unstable. Repeated shakings by earthquakes loosened slope material and sent it crashing down as some of the larger landslides in the state of Utah. Thompson Creek Landslide near Monroe (this one is supposed to be the largest in Utah), Elbow Landslide near Marysvale, and The Brink near Burrville are the largest. There are numerous other landslides ringing Monroe Mountain. Thus, the gently rolling top of Monroe Mountain stands in stark contrast to the steep slopes surrounding it.     Landforms, Stream Channels and Soils Geologic materials and soils form the foundation for ecosystems. They provide primary productivity in supporting plant growth. They also regulate hydrologic function of watersheds by storing and releasing water from precipitation or snowmelt.  Primary landform types in the project area include hills and mountains, hillslopes, floodplains and terraces, and the valley floors. Soils in the project area are closely associated with these primary landform types. The hillslopes borders the mountain areas and is comprised of alluvial deposits transported from the mountains over many thousands of years. Valley floor landforms lie at the lower portions of the main intermountain valleys and consist of stream, lake, and wind deposits.  Mass wasting is not a dominant process in the Project Area. However, rock fall, shallow landslides, deep-seated landslides, and debris flows may be potential hazards to roads and other facilities in the hill and mountain portions of the Project Area. In very steep terrain (greater than 30 - 40 percent slope) hill slopes could be vulnerable to slope failure and related surface erosion because of their excessive heights and slopes. Almost all of the forested land in the Project Area occurs in the hill and mountain areas. Water and wind erosion hazard is minimal for undisturbed soils. When disturbed, these soils are subject to erosion. Special methods and erosion control best management practices may be needed to prevent or limit soil loss in the hill and mountain areas.  The soils formed in alluvium and are generally on stable geomorphic surfaces, but they can be subject to flooding on active alluvial fans. In undisturbed sites, these soils have a low to slight erosion hazard due to protective cover from vegetation and surface gravel, but they have a high erosion hazard in disturbed areas.  Seeps, springs, and channels have narrow riparian vegetation zones where moisture is available for most of the growing season. These riparian zones are important in the Project Area because of their small extent in the region and their importance to plants and wildlife. They provide stability to streambanks and soils, and if damaged, erosion and water quality impacts can occur. The soils on floodplains and terraces are generally on zero to eight percent (0-8%) slopes. Most of the floodplain soils have a seasonal high water table, and some areas are subject to flooding for brief periods from March through June. These soils are formed in alluvium. Floodplain soils are relatively young and exhibit little, if any, profile development. Some of the terrace soils occur on older geomorphic surfaces and exhibit a moderate degree of soil development. Floodplain and terrace soils have fine to moderately coarse textured surface and subsurface layers. The soils are well to poorly drained, and runoff is slow for most floodplain and terrace soils. Erosion potential is minimal for undisturbed soils on terraces. Terrace soils subject to disturbance will have an increased erosion potential. Floodplain soils subject to disturbance may erode and result in sedimentation in the stream because of the nearness to channels.  Valley floor soils generally do not occur within the Project Area; however, existing and potential lease-related access roads to the Project Area may cross basin floor soil types. The valley floor slopes are zero to four percent. These soils were formed from lake sediments, alluvium over lake sediments, and windblown clay, silts and sands. Valley floor soils on more recent deposits are poorly developed. Soils formed on slightly older geomorphic surfaces exhibit minimal soil development. Some of the basin floor soils have a seasonally high water table, and they are subject to occasional flooding. Valley floor soils are very deep and fine to moderately coarse textured throughout the profile. Runoff is very slow to slow for most valley soils. Water and wind erosion hazard is minimal for undisturbed soils and moderate to high for disturbed areas.  Sheetwash and rill erosion is common on sloping road surfaces in the Project Area following disturbance. Road surfaces and ditches concentrate storm runoff that can cause gully erosion if not properly dispersed. Ground disturbing activities in most areas of the Forest can occur with standard erosion, drainage, and restoration methods without resource impacts. However, soils will likely continue to erode as a result of grazing, vegetation conversion, fires, existing roads, recreation, and by natural conditions.  Streambanks, channels, channel migration zones, and floodplains have the potential for soil erosion, if disturbed. Vegetation plays an important part in protecting streambanks and preventing erosion along creeks. Streambanks can be steep and easily erode once disturbed. The most apparent areas of soil erosion in the Project Area are along road and creek channels, trails and camping areas where vegetation disturbance from people, grazing, and channel incision has occurred.  Within streams, quality of surface water and aquatic habitat is directly linked to channel stability and integrity of riparian habitat. Channel stability, including maintenance of stream dimension, pattern, and profile is dependent on a balance of sediment load, sediment size, and discharge within each watershed (Lane 1955). Also riparian vegetation plays an integral role in this stabilization of streams. Changes in discharge and size or quantity of sediment load will cause shifts within the channel through modification of the channel shape and gradient by deposition, channel incision, abandonment, or lateral migration. Watershed disturbances, which can alter discharge or sediment supply, may have adverse effects on stream stability, water quality, and aquatic habitat. These watershed disturbances include both natural events and human activities. Natural events include fire and floods. Land use activities include road building, water diversion or development, vegetation conversions (i.e., thinning or harrow application), grazing, oil and gas development, mining, etc.  Streams vary in their sensitivity to disturbance and changes in discharge or sediment produced by their watershed. Parameters relating to quality of water and riparian habitat have been quantitatively measured on numerous streams within watersheds throughout the Project Area. Only the 303(d) listed waters were discussed in depth. This information will serve as baseline data for analysis of proposals. Anecdotal observations suggest that many stream segments within the project area have been degraded to some extent by past land uses, watershed disturbance, and large flooding events.  Most soils within the project area that are dry when burned at low to moderate intensity and having a short residence time will not likely have limitations to being treated. But some smaller areas on steep slopes might have slight to severe limitations if burned at high severity. There are areas within the project area that likely will not burn easily due to insufficient ground cover and consequently will need to burn at moderate to high intensity or will likely have hydrophobic conditions following fire that will likely lead to accelerated erosion loses following the burning treatments (6 files or soil displays located with hydrologist files).  There are not unstable lands or soils within the project area. However, there are large areas of slopes over 40 percent that would be considered very steep that when disturbed could lead to accelerated erosion and flooding. These slopes should not have wheeled or track equipment on them.  Most of the soil disturbance would result from removing groundcover and by hydrophobic soil formation. Best management practices (BMPs) can reduce soil disturbance effects to the areas surrounding the project operations. BMPs can reduce off-site effects more in the low to moderately steep areas, and with greater difficulty and less effectiveness in the steep areas.  Analysis area And Issues Cumulative Effects Area (CEA) or Subwatershed Area is an area of land that could be only part of the HUC 6 area. CEAs are logical places to focus in on based on locations of treatments, in stream features such as reservoirs, lakes, or areas of different management activities that can be determined such as points in channel at the Forest Boundary or at confluences. These areas are typically much smaller in scope than the larger HUC 4 and 5 areas. Additional activities besides those being proposed within the CEAs or HUC 6 areas include the Box Creek and Twin Peaks projects, the Box Creek Fire area, Forest Travel Plan, grazing, Monument Peak Fuels Reduction Project, and work in the Cove Area, and recreation. These activities and the proposed project activities will be used to assess the cumulative effects within the CEAs. Prescribed fire will be used most likely following the vegetation treatment in the areas where mechanical treatments area proposed and these areas will therefore aid in the limiting the areas and the severity of which prescribed fire will be used. The analysis area includes not only the project area boundary, but also the area of possible influence, which in this case is the Cumulative Effects Areas (CEAs), subwatershed (HUC6) scale units (some CEAs are the same as the HUC6 subwatersheds (Tables 4 and 7, Maps 1-4). The resources addressed by this report include water quality, streams, reservoirs and lakes, floodplains, wetlands, soils, and municipal watersheds. The important issues to be addressed include soils, water quality (beneficial use support impairment), floodplains, and wetlands. Municipal watersheds will need to be addressed because there are four State Source Water Protection Zones (SWPZs) within or near the project area (Water Creek (Big and Deep Lake Area), Thompson Basin, Monroe and Koosharem Creeks. These Groundwater-SWPZs have a very small or no likelihood of being impacted from these hillslope or vegetation treatments though. The impacts would need to infiltrate down into the ground to become an issue and that is highly unlikely. The existing condition includes information from the previous sections as part of the existing condition description within the analysis area of the project like water quality and forest plan information and uses as well as the analysis section. The more specific analysis areas that will be used to assess cumulative watershed effects includes the Huc6 or sometimes even smaller units or what I term Sub-HUC6 No Action HUC 6 HUC 6 Total Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Box Creek - Above Reservoirs 8,470 0 686 8% 904 542 6% 15% 734 9% 896 538 6% 15% 737 9% 893 536 6% 15% 725 9% 796 478 6% 14% Box Creek - Below Reservoirs 11,214 0 1,808 16% 445 267 2% 19% 2,098 19% 501 0% 19% 2,250 20% 501 301 3% 23% 1,974 18% 276 166 1% 19% Browns Canyon-Otter Creek 17,857 0 2 0% 422 253 1% 1% - 0% 424 254 1% 1% - 0% 424 254 1% 1% 3 0% 420 252 1% 1% Dry Canyon 59,521 0 72 0% 3,217 1,930 3% 3% 356 1% 3,031 1,819 3% 4% 754 1% 2,745 1,647 3% 4% 428 1% 2,959 1,775 3% 4% Dry Canyon - Hunts Lake 241 0 - 0% 116 70 29% 29% - 0% 116 0% 0% - 0% 116 70 29% 29% 0 0% 116 70 29% 29% Dry Creek - Lower 2,980 0 - 0% 209 125 4% 4% - 0% 209 125 4% 4% - 0% 209 125 4% 4% 0 0% 209 125 4% 4% Dry Creek - Upper 9,510 0 417 4% 3,007 1,804 19% 23% 951 10% 3,153 0% 10% 1,254 13% 3,153 1,892 20% 33% 1,204 13% 2,213 1,328 14% 27% Gold Creek-Sevier River 29,011 0 - 0% 830 498 2% 2% - 0% 830 498 2% 2% 1 0% 829 497 2% 2% 0 0% 830 498 2% 2% Greenwich Creek 11,922 0 1,721 14% 199 119 1% 15% 1,822 15% 195 117 1% 16% 1,864 16% 194 116 1% 17% 1,720 14% 195 117 1% 15% Koosharem Creek-Otter Creek 3,715 0 43 1% 582 349 9% 11% 69 2% 585 351 9% 11% 238 6% 508 305 8% 15% 39 1% 585 351 9% 10% Manning Creek - Barney Lake 283 0 - 0% 202 121 43% 43% 81 29% 121 73 26% 54% 130 46% 72 43 15% 61% 133 47% 70 42 15% 62% Manning Creek - Lower 7,857 0 - 0% 191 115 1% 1% - 0% 191 115 1% 1% - 0% 191 115 1% 1% 4 0% 191 115 1% 2% Manning Creek - Manning Reservoir 1,189 0 34 3% 367 220 19% 21% 190 16% 276 166 14% 30% 431 36% 41 25 2% 38% 281 24% 185 111 9% 33% Manning Creek - Upper 14,855 0 364 2% 3,704 2,222 15% 17% 740 5% 3,795 2,277 15% 20% 1,298 9% 3,553 2,132 14% 23% 1,188 8% 2,878 1,727 12% 20% Maple Creek-Sevier River 28,346 0 - 0% 316 190 1% 1% - 0% 316 190 1% 1% 9 0% 308 185 1% 1% 0 0% 316 190 1% 1% Mill Creek 11,800 0 225 2% 1,500 900 8% 10% 583 5% 1,255 753 6% 11% 869 7% 1,112 667 6% 13% 470 4% 1,255 753 6% 10% Monroe Creek 23,532 0 997 4% 9,017 5,410 23% 27% 2,297 10% 8,680 5,208 22% 32% 4,363 19% 7,190 4,314 18% 37% 3,150 13% 7,041 4,225 18% 31% Monroe Creek - Magleby 1,667 0 85 5% 413 248 15% 20% 330 20% 168 101 6% 26% 449 27% 49 29 2% 29% 330 20% 168 101 6% 26% Peterson Creek 31,202 0 12 0% 499 299 1% 1% 118 0% 392 235 1% 1% 266 1% 244 146 0% 1% 118 0% 392 235 1% 1% Pine Canyon-Otter Creek 18,464 0 - 0% 405 243 1% 1% - 0% 405 243 1% 1% - 0% 405 243 1% 1% 0 0% 405 243 1% 1% Pole Canyon-Otter Creek 26,120 0 1 0% 18 11 0% 0% 16 0% 18 11 0% 0% 16 0% 18 11 0% 0% 2 0% 16 10 0% 0% Swift Spring Creek 22,852 0 41 0% 738 443 2% 2% 40 0% 779 467 2% 2% 40 0% 779 467 2% 2% 113 0% 666 400 2% 2% Thompson Creek-Sevier River 12,681 0 - 0% 2,276 1,366 11% 11% 8 0% 2,267 1,360 11% 11% 346 3% 1,930 1,158 9% 12% 8 0% 2,267 1,360 11% 11% Thompson Creek-Sevier River - Annabella Reservoir 940 0 48 5% 626 376 40% 45% 217 23% 457 274 29% 52% 507 54% 167 100 11% 65% 223 24% 450 270 29% 52% Water Creek 29,962 0 1,106 4% 1,903 1,142 4% 8% 2,250 8% 1,573 944 3% 11% 3,168 11% 1,175 705 2% 13% 1,802 6% 1,201 721 2% 8% Water Creek - Big Lake 3,409 0 525 15% 726 436 13% 28% 743 22% 562 337 10% 32% 845 25% 470 282 8% 33% 1,159 34% 91 55 2% 36% Grand Total 389,600 8,187 32,832 19,699 13,643 31,195 16,455 19,835 27,276 16,366 15,074 26,191 15,715 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Table 4: Hydrological Units (HUC6 or Sub-Huc6) and Treatment Acres  Maps 1-4: (maps that should be referenced to Tables 4 and 7). Theses maps shows that the project area-Alternatives 2 to 5 in relationship to the Forest and previous activities and with the other alternatives.   watersheds or delineated analysis cumulative effects areas (CEAs) in which the various proposed project units are located (see Tables 4 and 7and Maps 1-4). These areas were selected because they encompasses the geographic area that could have contributions from direct and indirect effects on watershed resources, as well as cumulative effects from the proposed actions and past, ongoing and proposed management activities (including Aquatic and Boreal Toad areas of concern). Information and Best Available Science used to support Analysis, findings and conclusions. Water Quality data: Final_NF_Box_Creek_Oldroyd_Fire_Mon_Report (2003) is a monitoring report of water quality data, stream conditions, macroinvertebrates, fish, Boreal toads, and Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER) treatment effectiveness that compares both pre and post Oldroyd wildfire conditions for North Fork of Box Creek written by Jim Whelan (Joint State and Forest Fisheries Biologist). Oldroyd_2003observations.doc is an Oldroyd wildfire BAER treatment effectiveness monitoring report written by Dale Deiter (Forest Hydrologist) years ago. From work the Forest specialists completed for the Box Creek Fire BAER Report states that no traditional hillslope treatments such as seeding or straw mulching were needed following the fire to protect values within and below the fire. Since the fire there have been very few issues with flooding or sediment delivery from the fire into the stream and reservoirs.  Jeff Petty/ Shell Valley Consulting Level II Riparian surveys for Koosharem, Box, Greenwich, and Manning Creeks. Overall the riparian conditions are stable on Monroe Mountain. But there are reaches that are being impacted from uses such as grazing. Some historic incising of channels occurred on some reaches and there is some localized channel adjusting occurring within and around some of these reaches. Monroe and Manning Creeks, all of the North Fork Box Creek tributary channels, and the Greenwich Creek tributaries are in good conditions with no or low entrenchment within and just below the project boundary. Both wildlife and cattle grazing occur throughout the area and some areas show evidence of bank trampling from both groups. South Fork Box Creek has a few areas where evidence of bare banks and trampling has occurred from cattle. Box Creeks have numerous areas that contain beaver dams, and large willowed wetland complexes, that aid in flood routing, and limiting flooding effects on Box Creeks and aid in these creeks functioning properly. In the non-wetland stream channel areas (beaver dam-willow complexes), the streams are typically only slightly entrenched but are able to put flood flows onto their floodplains. Although in a few areas on South Fork Box Creek, the stream is moderately entrenched resulting in the loss of wetland riparian area, and conversion to upland vegetation and now are unable except possibly extremely high floods from accessing the now abandoned floodplains. Some of these areas might be where beaver dam complexes existed in the past, but for unknown reason(s) are not there now (aspen and willows decline in the immediate area, irrigators, trappers, cattle, and or flooding blowing, or moving them out are likely possibilities however). GIS Coverage’s: Fishlake waterbody, stream, past activity, contour, ownership, travel route, existing vegetation, precipitation, watershed, hydrology point, management areas, fire history, soils, and public water systems. Forest digital raster grid coverage (electronic version of a topographic map) and Forest SEQ quads were also used. Additional Data: NOAA precipitation frequency Estimates from NOAA Atlas 14 for the project unit (NWS 2007). This resource gives reasonable calculations of likely precipitation frequencies or specific year storm rates in inches per unit of time (i.e. a 2-yr storm event that is 0.61 inches in 30 minutes at the Box Creek Station). Annual precipitation is approximately 30-32 inches in the project area (Fishlake Precipitation Coverage). Utah Division of Environmental Quality-Division of Water Resources Utah Lake and Reservoirs information such as location, photographs, morphometry, and characteristics for Lower Box Creek Reservoir, and Manning Meadow Reservoir. Disturbed WEPP Model Assumptions and Results (Elliot, William J. et al. 2000) Disturbed Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) gives the probabilities of annual erosion to disturbed forest conditions, where a forest quickly re-vegetates following a disturbance. To estimate an average annual erosion, Disturbed WEPP generates a stochastic climate for the climate selected, for the number of years specified. The WEPP model then runs a daily simulation for the specified period of time, and calculates the average annual runoff, erosion, and sediment yield values.  To determine the probability values of runoff, erosion, and sedimentation, Disturbed WEPP is run for the number of years requested, and the annual values of runoff, erosion, and sediment yield are generated by WEPP. Disturbed WEPP then sorts the annual values by magnitude. For a 50-year run, the largest values estimate a 50-year return period (or 0.02 probability of occurring) value; the second largest, a 25-year return period; the fifth largest a ten-year return; and the 20th largest a 2.5-year return period. The average value is the same as a 2-year return period regardless of the number of years of simulation selected. For forest conditions, there are two levels of forest age: 5-year-old and 20-year-old. By the time a forest reaches 20 years of age, the impact of the canopy and residue accumulation is sufficient to provide as much erosion protection as can be achieved from vegetation. The 5-year-old forest is considered a reasonable condition to describe a forest that has been heavily logged, leaving some side trees and considerable groundcover, or to describe a forest one to two years after a prescribed fire, or two to three years after a wildfire. The skid trail condition describes a compacted, bladed skid trail with very little cover. The WEPP Model is therefore a tool that can be used to analyze the risk involved (probabilities) of various events. Analysis was done using the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) model. The WEPP model uses soils information, slope, and ground cover similar to the special protection areas but with the addition of climate statistical information. The probability of erosion and sediment yield was predicted for short period following treatment when the thinning and prescribed burn areas will be most vulnerable to the effects from high intensity storm events (Table 5). The thinning and burn area have been designed with adequate riparian special protection areas to maintain a probability below or equal to four percent probability that there will be sediment yield in the year following thinning (large storm events only). The WEPP model predicts that treated hillslopes will have an increased probability of sediment delivery to streams from 2 up to 4 percent (increase of two percent). A treatment unit with a probability of 4 percent or less will begin to deliver sediment to streams if a 25-year storm or greater (large storm events) occurs the year following the thinning or fire activities. It is expected that the probabilities will decrease each subsequent year following treatment until vegetation occurs.  Table 5: WEPP Probabilities of Erosion, and Sedimentation. The WEPP results can be found in the project file. Similar erosion rates are expected from nearly all drainages in the project area to those of Manning and Box Creeks shown in this table from mechanical (similar to thinning) and prescribed fire. These values can be used to compare no action, mechanical treatments and prescribed burn slopes with or without treatments. Activity and location Probability there is erosion (%) Probability there is sediment delivery (%) Skid Trails (sedimentation and erosion likely from 50-yr storm event or greater with a 0-2% chance of occurring in first year following treatment). 0-2% 0-4% Hillslope without mechanical treatment or prescribed fire above the streams for Box Creek (No Action) ~0% 0-4% Hillslope mechanical treatment from Box Creek (sedimentation and erosion likely from 50-yr storm event or greater with a 0-2% chance of occurring in first year following treatment). 0-2% 0-4% Low Severity Fire from Box Creek (sedimentation likely from 25-yr storm event or greater with a 0-4% chance of occurring first year following treatment). 0-36% 0-4% High Severity Fire from Box Creek (sedimentation likely from 5-yr storm event or greater with a 0-20% chance of occurring first year following treatment). 100% 0-32% Low Severity Fire from Manning Hillslope downstream of reservoir (sedimentation likely from 25-yr storm event or greater with a 0-4% chance of occurring first year following treatment). 0-42% 0-4% High Severity Fire from Manning Hillslope downstream of reservoir (sedimentation likely from 5-yr storm event or greater with a 0-20% chance of occurring first year following treatment). 100% 0-34% PROCESS DESCRIPTIONS AND INDICATORS FOR THE PRINCIPLE ISSUES Hydrologic Responses to Fires and Mechanical Treatments  Fires can alter soil and vegetation characteristics resulting in increased quantity of flows: Reduction of vegetation and forest floor litter results in decreases in interception and evapotranspiration, and infiltration rates. This means increased water becomes available for overland flow and stream runoff. Increased flows in turn lead to increased erosion and sedimentation (Zwolinski 2000). Prescribed fires (low and moderate severity) are designed so that vegetation remains in some form (wood, litter, and duff) to cover soils (Zwolinski 2000). Wildfires (high severity) have no plan or design to them and result in greater reduction in vegetation and soil cover that consequently leads to even greater amounts of stream runoff, erosion, and sedimentation. High severity fires, which may be greater due to past fire suppression activities, can lead to greater effects including water repellent soils since formation is dependent on heating temperatures and soil moisture (Robichaud 2000). Prescribed fires commonly occur during the spring and fall when soils are wetter and therefore, water repellency would be minimal which would lead to not as great of increases in water yield compared to wildfires (Robichaud 2000).  Mechanical and fire treatments alter soil and vegetation characteristics resulting in increased quantity of flows, erosion, and sedimentation. Additional effects may impact water quality, soil productivity, aquatic habitat and species, and riparian areas (Elliot et. al. 2010, See Chapters 5- Watershed Effects of Fuel Management and Conclusion section specifically by Robichaud et. al.; Chapters 6-Effects on Channel Erosion; 8-Effects on Water Quality; 9-Effects on Soil Productivity; 10-Effects on Riparian Areas; 11-Effects on Aquatics; 12-Lanscape Scale effects on Water Resources such as this type of project). Some of the effects of mechanical treatments include the impacts of landings, skid trails, and temporary road construction and obliteration of course. Sediment Production and Delivery Sediment production and delivery, as used in this analysis, refers to surface erosion from hillslopes from either mechanical treatments or prescribed fire. Increasing fire severity results in greater peakflows (flooding), nutrient losses, and promotes erosion by reducing or eliminating protective organic soil layers and by causing the soil to repel water. The primary indicator of sediment production and delivery is the results and comparison of alternatives from the WEPP modeling for the no action-unburned, no action-wildfire, and proposed action-prescribed fire and mechanical treatments from the various potential action alternatives (Table 5). At best, any predicted runoff or erosion value, by any model, will be within only plus or minus 50 percent of the true value. Erosion rates are highly variable, and most models can predict only a single value. Replicated research has shown that observed values vary widely for identical plots, or the same plot from year to year (Elliot et al. 2000). WEPP can be used to compare both fire and mechanical treatments of vegetation.    DEBRIS FLOW PRONE AREAS There is always the concern of having debris-flows following fire. Debris flows can lead to damage of channels and values below fires. A tool used to predict whether or not drainages are prone to debrisflows has been created. Susan Cannon and her colleagues who developed a method to predict debrisflow events states: “…Basins burned at moderate and high severities over more than 50 percent of their areas were susceptible to debris-flow activity… The conditions described here are likely to produce debris flows from recently burned basins in the future (Cannon et al. 2003).” Using their basin area/relief ratio threshold method it shows that given sufficient rainfall, that the watersheds found in the watershed analysis data table below are all prone to debris flow events (except for the Upper Box Creek Tributaries, but these tributaries are near the threshold and are still could be prone to debris flows under the right conditions) if 50 percent or more of the drainages were burned at least moderate severity given their relief ratio and areas (Table 6) (Cannon et al. 2003).    Table 6.       Debris-Flow Prone Analysis Watershed Data    Watershed Name Approximate Drainage Area Relief Ratio Debris Flow Prone?    text miles2 dimensionless Y or N    S. Fork Box 5.3 0.08 NO    N. Fork Box 5.7 0.08 NO    Monroe Creek 39.4 0.15 YES    Greenwich (Boundary) 18.6 0.10 YES    S. Fork Greenwich 7.5 0.10 YES    Manning Upper (dam to canyon mouth) 16.4 0.11 YES    Dry Creek Upper to boundary 17 0.10 YES    Dry Canyon (Canyon Mouth) 23.3 0.16 YES    Koosharem to Diversion 5.80 0.11 YES    Thompson Basin (Boundary) 9.60 0.21 YES  This table is used to show that care must be used when implementing prescribed burns with the project area. Nearly every drainage using this method would be considered (or very close to) being debris-flow prone if entire drainages were treated at one time. Another important factor is that many of the smaller tributaries to these drainages too would all likely be debris-flow prone by themselves and so again care should be taken to avoid burning out tributary drainages with moderate and high severity fires over fifty percent of those drainages too. Hence the Forest Fisheries Biologist and Hydrologist have requested to only treat portions of Sub-HUC6 or HUC6 areas over time and then recommend reentry into areas only after some vegetation recovery has occurred. Uses of the listed design features are important to limit or eliminate watershed impacts.  Drainages of concern due to percentages of HUC6, sub-HUC6 or amount of acres on Forest to be treated, or values of importance within or below the drainage are described in the section below.  Box Creek would actually have about 20% additional area treated of the HUC6 area and with Cumulative effects this should be treated with care and potentially over multiple entries using the listed design features. There is a diversion at the boundary that could be affected by flooding and debris from treatment areas below the reservoirs. The reservoirs were constructed to provide irrigation water below the Forest and are managed primarily for irrigation and not much concern is given to the fisheries water quality impairment. The TMDL (Total Maximum Day Load) plan for Lower Box Creek Reservoir is a low priority at this time. The Box Creek Project will likely lead to a good portion of the watershed being considered being restored (about 10%) following the project completion and vegetation recovery.  Dry Canyon would actually have about 50% of the Forest acres of the HUC6 area treated and consequently due to debris-flow prone nature of drainage and community below the drainage this drainage should likely be treated over multiple entries using the described design features. The alluvial fan nature of the mouth of canyon means water and debris could flow anywhere below the fan and must not be thought of only flowing in the current channel on the fan. Again, this basin is highly debris-flow prone.  Greenwich Creek will have up to 17% of the HUC6 treated with even higher percentage of the South Fork tributary of mechanical treatment. So may not be as big of issue if acres to be treated were predominantly fire acres and if treatments use described design features. There is a diversion at the Forest boundary that could be affected by debris and flooding.  Dry Creek Canyon has up to 33% of the drainage being proposed for treatment. Care should be taken to limit flooding events on the road and through culverts near the bottom and below the Forest. Use the listed and described design features to achieve this.  Manning Creek is broken up into many analysis areas but overall this drainage should be treated over multiple entries, especially within the Manning Creek Upper or mainstem, above the reservoir and within the Barney Lake area. Channel conditions are important in this drainage and limiting flooding events of larger magnitude should be a factor on area to be implemented with each entry. This drainage has the uber-important Bonneville Cutthroat Trout fishery within Manning Meadow Reservoir despite there being some water quality issues that will likely lead to a TMDL plan in the future. The TMDL is low priority at this time. Treatment within the drainage actually could be considered by some to be importance to prevent some potential wildfire type issues and to protect the reservoir and Bonneville Cutthroat Trout fishery. It will be a balancing act between water quality and watershed restoration over the life of the project and until vegetation has recovered well enough. Fencing will aid in protecting vegetation recovery to aid in protecting water quality and aid in watershed restoration.  Monroe Creek has up to about 27 to 37% of the drainage being proposed for treatment. With the values downstream of this drainage that includes Monroe, the hydropower plant, fishery, private ponds, and diversions great care should be taken when treating these drainages and of course using multiple entries. Maintaining the channel access to floodplains and hydrologic function is very important in this case due to the downstream values. The largest Source Water Protection Zones are within this drainage. Use the listed and described design features.  Mill Creek has diversions below the Forest and care should be taken when treating the 10-13% of the area to avoid impacts to the diversion and to the fish hatchery from Little and Birch Creeks. Water is used for irrigation on private lands. Use the design features listed.  Thompson Creek (Basin) is very steep and cliffy in appearance. With the large percentage of the drainage proposed for treatment and with the values below this area (homes and canal) great care should be taken to limit flooding, and debris-flow events. It appears that about 50% of the Forest area is being proposed for treatment. The alluvial fan below Thompson Creek has multiple flow paths below the mouth of canyon and flooding and debris could potentially go anywhere below or on the fan. Over the last decade I have observed new flow paths on the fan every few years. Multiply entries would be imperative in this area to protect values below the Forest. One of the larger Groundwater Source Protection Zones is within this drainage. Large storms frequently move down Clear Creek from the west and blow into this area causing big storms and flooding events. This drainage is highly debris-flow prone. Use listed design features.  Water Creek has the potential to affect diversions downstream of the Forest and add sediment to Big Lake. One of the Groundwater Source Protection Zones is located within this drainage. Water is used for irrigation on private lands. Use listed design features.  Koosharem Creek has about 15% of the area proposed for treatment and has one of the Groundwater Source Protection Zones within it. It has a diversion as well. Water is used for irrigation on private lands. When this project is added to the Monument Peak Project then about 70% of the drainage will be treated and with values downstream including the town of Koosharem great care should be taken to prevent large floods downstream using the existing design criteria.  Drainages that compared to the drainages above do not have the issues, values, or large areas to be treated include Browns Canyon, Pine Canyon, Pole Canyon, Swift Spring, Manning Creek Lower, and Jensen Creek south of Thompson Creek, Gold Creek, Peterson Creek, and Maple Creek. There is not a great need to carry forward analysis of these drainages. However, the general treatment effects will be applied in the general sense of having mechanical or prescribed fire treatments within them throughout this report. Use design features listed. Direct and Indirect Effects Analysis & Conclusions The desired condition for watershed resources as stated in the Land and Resource Management Plan for the Fishlake is to maintain water quality to meet State standards, manage municipal watersheds to protect quality of water supplies (The Fishlake only has Groundwater Source Protection Areas), and maintain productive streams, lakes, and riparian areas and mitigate hazards on floodplains (FLRMP 1986, p. IV-4).  The use of riparian special protection zones (buffers or non-treatment areas) is an important indicator of potential effects to floodplains, wetlands, and water quality being mitigated from this type of BMP. If activities do not occur or are not located near riparian resources then the likelihood of negative effects on aquatic resources decreases or is eliminated. Special protection for riparian zones with Boreal toad concerns will occur in the project area. The use of riparian special protection zones treatments in this project area will aid dramatically in limiting or eliminating effects to floodplains, and water quality being mitigated from this type of BMP (meaning were not proposing ignition or mechanical treatment with 100 feet or only on the edges of riparian areas) (Mayer, P.M., et al. 2005., pp. iv, 3-4, 17). The special treatment will be to having fire back into riparian areas or to treat when dry, or during the winter when soils are frozen. The riparian buffers should be an appropriate enough distance away to limit or capture some sedimentation of stream from the project area because of the slopes that are proposed to be treated on the average are less than 40% in gradient (FLRMP. 1986. p. IV-43) and the WEPP Modeling results located in Table 5.  WEPP modeled probability of erosion and sediment delivery (percent probability). The probabilities can be used as a risk assessment comparison for erosion and sedimentation from varying alternatives or treatment methods. Low probability percentages imply that large storm events need to occur for the erosion and sedimentation events to occur whereas high percentages imply that small storms could likely lead to the erosion or sedimentation event (Table 5). Modeling results for skid trails and hillslopes mechanically treated resulted in low probabilities of erosion and sedimentation (0-4%) for the proposed activities. Modeling results for prescribed burns resulted in higher probability of erosion (0-42%), but low probability of sedimentation that is similar to the thinning (0-4%). This suggests that erosion is more likely to occur on burn units but that the eroded sediment typically still stays on site, rather than moving off site into streams. Therefore there is a low probability and risk that water quality will be affected or additionally impaired from the proposed actions and the risk will continue to decrease each year as the disturbed areas become vegetated which could take around 5-years.  The Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) model can be used to predict hillslope erosion from disturbed forest events and as a way to compare alternatives including prescribed fire and wildfires (Elliot et al. 2000). The approach is to predict the erosion occurring after a disturbance by modeling the desired years of climate. The results will emphasize the risk of various erosion events occurring immediately after fires and until the area has recovered (Robichaud 2000). For example, 10 years of storm data will be used to predict the 10-year return interval event that has a probability of 0.1 of occurring. The 5-year return interval and the 2-yr return interval are also predicted (Elliot et al. 2000). A 10-year value will be exceeded, on the average; about once every ten years and that the 2-year value will be exceeded, on the average once every two years, and five times in ten years. There is a 1/10 or ten percent chance that a value equal to or greater than the 10-year value will occur a given year. Conversely, there is ninety percent chance that precipitation; runoff, erosion, or sediment yield will be less than the 10-year value. Also note, the accuracy of a predicted erosion rate is, at best, plus or minus fifty percent due to the fact that erosion rates are highly variable. Even observed study plots have values that vary widely from year to year (Elliot et al. 2000). WEPP uses climate, soil texture, topography, and plant communities in the prediction of sediment yields.  Consequently, the mechanical treatment areas have been designed with adequate riparian special protection areas to maintain a probability below or equal to 4 percent probability that there will be sediment yield in the first year following mechanical treatment. The WEPP model predicts that treated hillslopes will have a probability of sediment delivery to streams around 4 percent. A unit with a probability of 4 percent or less will begin to deliver sediment from skid trails and mechanically treated hillslopes into streams if a 25-year storm or greater occurs the year following the mechanical activities. The risk of implementation of the proposed project is consequently low the first year following treatment and will decrease even further each additional year following treatment as vegetation again becomes more reestablished each year.  Water and Sediment Yields: Water and sediment yields vary depending on precipitation, evapotranspiration, soils, vegetation type, fire severity, geology, topography, and proportion of the vegetation burned (Robichaud 2000). According to Robichaud “Sediment yields after prescribed burns and wildfires range from very low in flat terrain and in the absence of major rainfall events to extreme in steep terrain affected by high intensity thunderstorms. Soil erosion after fires can vary from under 0.4 to 2.6 ton/acre/year from prescribed burns to over 9 to 49 ton/acre/year from wildfires (Robichaud 2000).” It is assumed that our erosion rates will be within the ranges shown above and WEPP runs had values with in this range. Erosion and sedimentation rates typically decrease each year until they return back to the normal undisturbed rates. At best, any predicted runoff or erosion value, by any model, will be within only plus or minus 50 percent of the true value. Erosion rates are highly variable, and most models can predict only a single value. Replicated research has shown that observed values vary widely for identical plots, or the same plot from year to year (Elliot et al. 2000).  The WEPP results leads me to the prediction that beneficial water uses would not be impaired from the proposed project since there is low probabilities for sedimentation from the project area unless a large storm events (25-year storm event or greater) were to occur following thinning.  The small WEPP probability percentages as mentioned above would not likely (low risk) lead to impairment of the State beneficial uses and that effects would be unlikely, negligible and would likely maintain the existing levels and not lead to additional impairment of water quality. The CEAs are in good condition except for in a few small areas where some bank and wetland trampling occurs in the area of the springs and channels and in some hillslope areas of the mountain. The historical uses in the area have led to the existing condition, and the existing water quality levels. The watersheds have recreation, grazing from wildlife and cattle, roads, and cabin uses. These uses will likely continue to occur in the CEAs at rates similar to what they have in the recent past and thus are considered part of the existing and future uses within the analysis area too. The historic and existing uses have not led to any streams having beneficial uses impaired and will not likely to with the addition of this project within the analysis areas or CEAs based on using BMPs, modeling results, and existing water quality of the aquatic resources.  Compliance with State water quality standards will still be maintained in the streams. Lower Box Creek Reservoir water quality will not likely be impaired additionally from the action alternatives because first the likelihood of sediment entering the streams is low (buffers and soil characteristics), and second the sediment would likely be trapped within buffer areas, channel pools, numerous beaver dams, or Upper Box Creek Reservoir before it could become a problem within Lower Box Creek Reservoir. The Box Creek burn (no land treatments like seeding or mulch were proposed or completed within the burn of the low and moderate burn severities other than some road and culvert work) and Project area will continue to improve and will have additional vegetation recovery by the time the project will begin to be implemented which will aid in improving the uplands even more within the watershed.  A review of historic water quality data for Lower Box Creek Reservoir indicates that measurements have exceeded the total phosphorus (TP) indicator value during the last decade, although concentrations appear to be decreasing slightly (improving water quality) (UDEQ 2006, p.64). A trend assessment of TP measurements indicates that concentrations are exhibiting a decreasing trend (meaning water quality is improving) during the past decade even with the Oldroyd wildfire in the North Fork Box Creek drainage (UDEQ 2006, p. 65 and Figure 3.5). However, light increases until all treatments are completed may be occurring at this time and may do so until the completion of the original Box Creek Fuels Reduction Project, the total vegetation recovery of the Box Creek Fire, and the subsequent treatment from this project.  Direct effects are caused by the action occurring at the same time and place. Tractor skidding a tree on a skid trail would constitute a direct effect if sediment was displaced or soils became compacted at the time of the action. Indirect effects are caused by the action and occur at a later time or farther removed in distance. An example would be possible increased erosion rates from mechanical units in the first year following treatment. Cumulative effects result from the incremental effects of the proposed action when added to the other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions. Direct effects include to aquatic related resources include the physical disturbance of soil along the temporary roads, skid trails, and landings. Some compaction is likely along skid trails, and landings. The temporary roads will be ample distance away from riparian resources to prevent sedimentation into streams. WEPP model results show that there’s a 0-6% chance of erosion and 0-4% chance of sedimentation occurring from the project boundary. These results lead to the conclusion there is a low probability of water quality being directly additionally impaired as a result of this project. Especially when factoring in special protection areas along riparian resources general soil and watershed characteristics, and use of planned mitigation measures and BMPs. Indirect effects include increasing erosion rates above their undisturbed rates because of thinning types of disturbances. Although, WEPP and monitoring of thinning show that sedimentation in the area is not likely when mitigation measures and BMPs are used. If large storm events were to occur 25-year storm event or greater then sedimentation rates would increase above undisturbed rates based on the WEPP model and water quality could be temporarily affected (4% chance following first year of treatment and decreasing each year following treatment). There would still not likely be any effects to floodplains from the large storm event. Overall the channels are in good condition and would likely handle any reasonable increase in discharge without affecting the stream channels too negatively. There will not likely be any direct or indirect effects to municipal watershed (Groundwater Source Protection Zones). It is not likely to affect the groundwater from these types of surface or hillslope treatments. Grazing occurs within the project and analysis area. Recreation use occurs on the private and Forestlands within the analysis area. Travel routes are located throughout the CEAs. Grazing and travel routes have added sediment in to water bodies in the past and will likely continue to do so in the future. Upper Box Creek Reservoir is not impaired even with previous thinning, grazing, travel routes, and recreation use and would likely continue even with the proposed thinning activities occurring in the CEAs because of BMPs, and excluding steep slopes from mechanical treatments. Grazing is typically stopped for a period following prescribed burn to allow the area to recover following being disturbed. This means that cattle grazing effects would actually be halted for a period following treatment within the project area. This will likely lead to improved riparian and channel conditions following treatment in many cases.  Watershed conditions (compaction, erosion, soil cover, etc.) that change because of the treatment activities will likely revert back to those that currently exist in the CEAs in the next few years following treatment.  It is not likely that water quality would be impaired because of not implementing the proposed action unless you considered wildland fire taking place within the analysis area. In this case erosion and sedimentation rates would likely increase above those currently or those of the proposed action (individual WEPP runs for low and high severity wildland fire are included in the project record with the other WEPP runs) and then some impairment could occur (Table 5). Wetlands and channels might be burnt in the event of wildfire, which could change the vegetation composition in these areas as well. Riparian plant species that would not be disturbed from mechanical activities could be burnt and thus eliminating their hydrological functions including buffering sediment from entering streams and keeping water cool enough for aquatic wildlife. Steep slopes and wetlands that were eliminated from thinning project design could be burnt and could add to the negative effects on water quality, wetlands, and hydrological function.  If implemented, the mechanical and fire activities would leave the land with a thinner timber appearance and potentially with only slightly higher erosion rates and sediment yields for a short period of time (approximately five years). Fire is a natural process within the area, so having fire within the analysis area is not adding an unnatural mechanism that previously was not there historically. It just is that wildfire suppression has occurred in the area that has led to increased fuel loadings that can lead to increased severities on soil and water quality. All treatment areas for this project require that special protection for riparian areas will occur to the edges of perennial stream channels, lakes, and ponds, and be treated when soils are dry (normal BMP that is standard with mechanical treatments) or wet (prescribed burn) enough to not impact soils (most likely treat in spring or fall), riparian areas, or lead to additional water quality concerns. There will not likely be any impacts to municipal drinking water sources (Groundwater Source Water Protection Zones) as a result of the proposed thinning activities. The groundwater sources are not likely to be affected from any of the proposed hillslope actions.      DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF EXISTING OR REASONABLE AND FORSEEABLE ACTIVITIES  Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Vegetation Related Actions on Monroe Mountain.  The past, present and reasonable foreseeable future actions include: (Some of these actions were summarized from Table below) • Personal use Christmas tree sales on Monroe Mountain is factored into the existing condition as ongoing activity. Very little impacts or risks and a dispersed type of use. • Personal use fuelwood gathering on Monroe Mountain is factored into the existing conditions for ongoing activities. Very little impacts or risks and a dispersed type of use. • Private land development including new homes on Monroe Mountain is factored into existing conditions as ongoing activity. Extremely difficult to predict where, when and for how long with private lands. • Fuels reduction work on private lands is difficult to predict location and magnitude if any from these activities. • Recreational use – primarily hiking, horseback riding, mountain biking, OHV use, crosscountry skiing, hunting, fishing, and snowmobile use on Monroe Mountain is factored into the existing conditions of the mountain. • Swift Springs Water Development Project-This project would not likely have any overlap of time or space with this project and will not need to be factored into the effects analysis. • Livestock grazing is factored into the existing condition. Monroe Mountain Livestock Management Improvement Project will likely improve some riparian areas where new lines are constructed, but will likely off-set the riparian gains with additional upland uses where the new systems and fences now emphasize use. • Livestock management adjustments under the purview of Forest Service administrative authorities found in 36 CFR 222.4 is factored into the existing conditions as ongoing and existing conditions on Forest lands. These actions are not guaranteed and vary by year, so grazing is still just considered as part of normal allotment activities and rotations. • Ongoing maintenance of existing range infrastructure; fences, troughs, waterlines, etc. is factored into the existing condition. • Ongoing maintenance of roads and trails is factored into the existing condition.         The eleven activities in the table below (11 highlighted lines) will need to factor into the cumulative effects analysis for watershed or hydrological resources. The 11 lines are actually just 4 projects for this analysis though with each project highlighted a unique color and symbol. The Box Creek Project and Wildfire lines have been factored into together as Box Creek activities for this analysis. The Two Twin Peak and Monument Peak lines are factored as one project each as well. The North Clover and Cove Mountain projects are near to each other and will be considered as one project for this analysis. Table 8. Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions on Monroe Mountain Name Type of Action Year Acres *Twin Peaks Dixie Harrow 2012 578 +Cove Mountain Harvest 2014 1,774 +North Clover Harvest 2011 191 @Box Creek Phase 1 Harvest 2012 386 @Box Creek Phase 2 Harvest 2013 284 #Monument Peak Harvest 2014 400 #Monument Peak Prescribed Fire 2015 3,120 @Box Creek Prescribed Fire 2012 650 @Box Creek Prescribed Fire 2015 2,658 *Twin Peaks Prescribed Fire 2014 5,169 @Box Creek Wildfire 2012 1,520   Within the cumulative effects areas there are only a few reasonably foreseeable Forest Service activities that possibly could affect values at risk or hydrologic resources: one project is the Twin Peaks project*, which is in the process of being implemented. There is only a small amount of acres to be treated within the Swift Springs HUC6 watershed though from this project compared to the actual Twin Peaks Project that will treat about 5,747 (25% of the HUC6 watershed) acres compared to this project that will treat up to about 819 (only 3% more of the HUC6 watershed) acres from Alternatives 2 or 3. Prescribed burning has begun starting this year. I would not expect there to be an overlap of effects in either time or space from these two projects. The harrow acres were completed in 2012 and have already begun to recover. The treatment from this project is predominantly on the Northside of the watershed and the Twin Peaks project is on the Southside of the watershed. There is only one perennial stream reach and that begins on side of the mountain and becomes a losing stream below that in the channel. So fisheries or water quality are not issues. There are no other values of concern within or below this drainage.  Another project is the Box Creek Project@. Most of the work has been completed but there is some potential for there to be some overlap of effects in both time and space depending on when this project activity were to begin and the time that vegetation recovery would have returned to nearly pre-treatment areas. There have not been problems from the Box Creek Project on hydrologic resource though so the likelihood of there being cumulative effects would be very low and of a small magnitude. The Box Creek Wildfire, original Box Creek Project and this proposed project will lead to a strong majority of the HUC6 watershed having been treated, especially when factoring the Oldroyd Fire as well (likely greater than 50% of the watershed being treated). Since, there is a gradual treatment of multiple entries there will not likely be impacts too great to affect the hydrological resources. The Box Creek acres treated from Table 8 resulted in about 5,498 acres and 28% of the watershed being treated. With the proposed max acres to be treated of Alternative 3 at 4,381 from this project that would mean that about 22% more of the drainage or a total of about 50% being treated.  The Monument Peak Project# from Table 8 overlaps greatly with those acres proposed from this project. This project proposes treating about up to 15% of the HUC6 watershed. With the Monument Peak Project about 70 to 80% of this HUC6 watershed could be treated. The harvesting acres from Monument Peak from Table 8 above show that treating may begin this year. It would not be unreasonable to think that if this project is approved, than the prescribed burning would take place together from both projects. Due to the very large amount of the watershed being treated there could be cumulative effects on hydrological resources to water quality, stream channels, and the diversion works. Multiple entries should be used as described in the design features. If the treatments are spread-out over time and in the watershed then effects might be minimal to non-existent on watershed resources and especially as vegetation recovery starts.  The Cove Mountain and North Clover projects+ are similar type harvest activities within the timber management area of the Water Creek-Big Lake HUC6/CEA. The North Clover Project was competed previously with planting occurring this year. The Cove Project will primarily be to re-enter the timber units in the area of the project and take additional trees in the already disturbed areas. The original harvest units are part of the existing condition within this drainage that has led to there not being water quality issues in Big Lake. So, if by having some minor reentries by the Forest, than we will not likely lead to large impacts on watershed or hydrological resources or lead to water quality issues.  Activities, such as grazing, hunting, and recreation will continue as they have been and are not part of the decision for this environmental assessment. Grazing within the treatment units with prescribed fire will need to have livestock management changes as per the required design criteria and proposed action alternatives.  The current erosion rates and peakflows are the results of past and current activities on the public lands and many other factors such as geology and climate. The streams and hillslopes are in good enough conditions that our streams are complying with State water quality standards and the Clean Water Act. Therefore, it is not very likely that all of these activities together will increase sedimentation to streams or degrade the streams enough to have them listed on the State 303d list of impaired waters. DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF THE NO ACTION ALTERNATIVE Under this alternative, the Forest Service continues to maintain the long-term productivity and hydrologic function of soil and water resources. Sediment and water yields will remain as they have been and will be consistent with meeting all standards and guidelines relating to State water quality standards, assuming no wildfire or other disturbance occurs. The hazardous fuel loadings will likely continue to increase, which could lead to unwanted, high severity wildfire. In this event, teams would be called upon to fight the fire, and to assess the impacts of the burn, and to decide if emergency stabilization and rehabilitation would need to be implemented.  In the case that wildfire does impact soil and water resources, then the magnitudes of erosion rates and sedimentation would be similar to those described in this report (Tables 5). Soils may become water repellent. Increased peakflows or floods could occur (Elliott et. al. 2010). Erosion rates, landslides, and slumping may increase above those rates of undisturbed and prescribed fires conditions. Channels and stream crossing would be at greater risk from large floods, and water quality would decrease during storm events until the hillslopes recover with vegetation and lose their water repellency. Additional effects associated with wildfire would be those associated with fire suppression. Fireline construction including hand and dozer lines would directly impact soils by displacing top soil and compacting sub-soils, which could lead to additional sedimentation of streams and covering of cold water organism habitat by ash and sediment than that would come off the burned areas. An additional impact could be the addition of retardants on the hillslopes that could inadvertently wash into streams, thus affecting water quality.  DIRECT AND INDIRECT EFFECTS OF THE ACTION ALTERNATIVES If one of the four proposed action alternative were chosen, prescribed burning and mechanical activities would be implemented. The general type of effects of prescribed fire or mechanical treatments would not change for the most part by alternative. Mechanical treatments as proposed within the four action alternatives will not cause different affects because they are part of different alternatives. Same with prescribed fire will have the same potential affects or impacts no matter which of the four alternatives is chosen. The only real change would be the acres on which each alternative will be proposed by alternative. For example: Alternative 2 proposes about 8,187 acres of mechanical, 32,832 acres of fire for a total of about 41,019 acres across Monroe Mountain. Alternative 3 is proposing about 13, 643 acres mechanical and 31,195 acres fire for a total of about 44,838 acres. Alternative 4 proposes about 19,835 acres mechanical, 27,276 fire and total about 47,111 acres. Alternative 5 proposes about 15,074 acres mechanical, 26,191 fire and total about 41,265 acres.  Thus Alternative 2-8,187 acres, then Alternative 3-13,643 acres, then Alternative 5-15,074 acres, and then finally Alternative 4-19,835 acres would likely have the most approximate total impact from mechanical treatments based on the total number of approximate acres of Mechanical treatment being proposed at the landscape scale of Monroe Mountain. In addition, Alternative 5- 26,191 acres, then Alternative 4-27,276 acres, then Alternative 3-31,195 acres, and finally Alternative 2-32,832 acres would likely have the greatest impacts landscape wise from prescribed fire based on the total acres of fire being proposed.  There would be more specific changes based on the acres being treated within each HUC6 or CEA based on each action alternative of course. Tables 4 and 7, and Maps 1-4 should be used to visually compare the action alternatives to rank the effects of treatment type. In general, fire effects would likely be greater than mechanical treatments on an acre by acre comparison. So, based on Tables 4 and 7, and Maps 1-4 each action alternative might be less or more impactful depending on how each alternative either treats or does not treat acres and whether they are treated by fire or mechanical. There are too many variables or ranges of values that could happen by each alternative to categorically say which alternative would less or more impactful based on the HUC6 other than to say that I assumed mechanical treating an acre was the same impacts for each alternative and burning an acre was the same across alternatives to estimate impacts to watershed, soil, and hydrological resources. Comparing the no action alternative to the action alternatives is also difficult to predict impacts or what might happen other that the no-action alternative could be a range of less impactful for HUC6s that do not burn by wildfire but could also have greater impacts than from the action alternatives if portions of HUC6 drainages burned at higher proportions of high severities or burning in riparian areas that might not burn during the prescribed burning processes. Burn severities will likely be lower from prescribed fire rather than from wildfires. Region 4-The Intermountain Region of the Forest Service on average has had 15% of wildfires burn at high severity and 27% at moderate severity over the last 13 years; or 42% of wildland fire area are burning pretty hot (R4 Fire Averages from 2000-2013). Obviously the amount of high severity fire could be either less than or greater than average and would depend on a dynamic range of site specific conditions at the time of burning, and the subsequent watershed effects would depend on equally dynamic rain and weather events too.  Ranking of General Potential Hydrological Effects by Alternative for each HUC6 or SubHuc6 drainages by most likely having greatest effects first going to alternative with least amount of effects. No specific values are given, but use this table as means of comparing Alternatives within each drainage. Table 1 values of acres treated were used to visually rank the alternatives for potential Hydrological effects. There’s not at this scale a way to say which alternative across these watersheds will have the greatest or least impact, but only within each specific drainage are alternatives able to be compared.  It is likely that there will be negative effects to stream channels, or floodplains from the increased floods generated from some of the prescribed burned areas (Elliott et. al. 2010). However, most channels will be able to pass the magnitude of flows increased from fire activities with relative ease. The probabilities of there being erosion within the first year is relatively low and will decrease each year following burning of areas until they are negligible again as cover increases (Table 5). Sedimentation of channels has nearly the same probability of occurring as erosion (Table 5), but there will not be likely be effects on long term stream water quality from prescribed burns compared to if wildfire were to occur in the same area. Burn severities will likely be lower from prescribed rather than from wildfires. Region 4 on average has 15% of wildfires burn at high severity and 27% at moderate severity over the last 13 years; or 42% of wildland fire area are burning pretty hot (R4 Fire Averages from 2000-2013). It would be expected to have lower percentages than these from prescribed fire. The potential for debris flows and flooding would be much lower from prescribed fire areas then from wildfires because of the likely lower burn severities within the drainages.  CUMULATIVE EFFECTS TO VALUES-AT-RISK  Cumulative effects include the combined impacts of past, present, reasonably foreseeable and proposed management actions. Over the past 100+ years, the exclusion of burning, grazing practices, and climatic conditions have resulted in unnatural accumulation of hazardous fuels within the area. Specifically, there is a serious potential Greenwich Creek  Alternative 4 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 2 = Alternative 5 Koosharem Creek- Otter Creek  Alternative 3 > Alternative 4 > Alternative 2 > Alternative 5 Manning Creek - Barney Lake  Alternative 2 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 5 > Alternative 4 Manning Creek - Lower  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Manning Creek - Manning Reservoir  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Manning Creek - Upper  Alternative 4 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 2 > Alternative 5 Maple Creek-Sevier River  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects for uncharacteristic wildfires to occur in close proximity to communities near the area. Associated with these fires is the genuine potential for flooding, mudslides and debris flows if significant portions are damaged by severe wildfire burning conditions (Table 5, Debris-flow prone worksheet-Cannon et al. 2003, and Elliott et. al., 2010). No Action-No Wildfire and No Action-Wildfire The streams and hillslopes are in good enough conditions such that water quality parameters are complying with State standards, the Forest Plan, and the Clean Water Act. Therefore, it is not very likely that foreseeable activities will increase sedimentation to streams or decrease that there will not likely be long term effects on  Table 7: Rankings of effects from greatest to least within each drainage by action alternatives on watersheds. See Table 4 and Maps 1-4. The no-action alternative impacts could rank from less than any of the action alternative if a HUC6 watershed is not burned or has only a small fire to greater than all the action alternatives bases on a wildland fire that burns hot and then subsequently has flooding and debris flows following the fire (Clay Springs, Devils Den, and some drainages of the Twitchell Canyon Fire are examples of large flooding and debris flow events that would likely be much more impactful than prescribed fire at lower severity that have occurred on the Forest). Consequently, the no-action alternative is not shown in the table but should be ranked in the range of as being potentially less than the action alternatives up to greater than the action alternatives for all of the watersheds listed in this table. Box Creek - Above Reservoirs All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Box Creek - Below Reservoirs  Alternative 5 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 2 > Alternative 4 Browns Canyon- Otter Creek  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Dry Canyon  Alternative 3 = Alternative 4 > Alternative 2 = Alternative 5 Dry Canyon - Hunts Lake  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Dry Creek - Lower  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Dry Creek - Upper  Alternative 4 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 2 > Alternative 5 Gold Creek-Sevier River  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Mill Creek  Alternative 2 > Alternative 4 > Alternative 5 > Alternative 3 Monroe Creek  Alternative 4 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 2 > Alternative 5 Monroe Creek - Magleby  Alternative 2 > Alternative 4 > Alternative 3 = Alternative 5 Peterson Creek  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Pine Canyon-Otter Creek  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Pole Canyon-Otter Creek  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Swift Spring Creek  All Action Alternatives basically equal in effects Thompson Creek- Sevier River  Alternative 2 = Alternative 3 = Alternative 5 > Alternative 4 Thompson Creek- Sevier River - Annabella Reservoir  Alternative 2 > Alternative 3 = Alternative 5> Alternative 4 Water Creek  Alternative 2 > Alternative 3 > Alternative 4 > Alternative 5 Water Creek - Big Lake  Alternative 2 = Alternative 3 > Alternative 5 > Alternative 4  stream water quality from prescribed burns compared to if wildfire were to occur in the same area. Values at risk, including streams enough to have them listed on the State 303d list of impaired waters, or will lead to their degradation. The hydrologic values-at-risk will not be affected negatively if the no action alternative is chosen, unless high severity fires were to occur in some HUC6 watersheds. But no-one can predict which drainages this will occur or not and when.  If unwanted high severity wildfire were to occur then the effects would be similar to those that have occurred from other wildfire areas on the Forest. For example, hydrophobic or repellent soils will form, runoff, erosion, and sedimentation of streams will occur. Debris flows will be very likely if there is mostly moderate or high severity wildfire occurring from drainages, as was the case on areas of the Cottonwood Fire southwest of Marysville in the area. Channels and floodplains would likely be affected by the increase in flows and would likely be scoured away in areas where debris flow events occurred.  Values-at- risk, including water quality would most likely be affected negatively by wildfire. Flooding events similar to those that occurred from the Cottonwood Fire may occur within the area, and genuinely could occur a few times. Water quality would likely be affected negatively during runoff and storm events until the burned area became revegetated and the water repellent soils nearly rehabilitated. The decrease in water quality would not likely causes streams to be put on the State 303d list, but downstream uses would be affected. Excess sediment could periodically affect livestock and agricultural uses of water. Increased peakflows cumulatively would increase the ranges of sediment being removed from the hillslopes, channels banks and beds above those rates currently occurring in the area. The hydrologic and social values-at-risk would likely be affected if high severity fire were to occur.  Proposed Actions If the proposed actions were implemented, then the cumulative effects would be based on the indirect and direct effects of the foreseeable actions and the proposed actions.  The result from burning coupled with higher soil temperatures would increase nutrient cycling making more of the stored nutrients available to plants. Plants, especially on units burned in the spring, would quickly capture these nutrients. The riparian areas not ignited or burned along channels would function as filter zones for upslope runoff. Reducing existing fuel loadings would decrease the potential for severe wildfire within the area. The Cumulative Effect Areas (CEAs) on Maps 1-4 and Tables 4 and 7 values and ranges found in Table 5 show predicted values and ranges of current and proposed actions erosion and sedimentation rates of areas within the area.  It is likely that there will be negative effects to stream channels, or floodplains from the increased peakflows generated from the prescribed burned areas somewhere in the projects area. However floodplains and channels function at moving material and water through them and is expected from any flooding to have some floodplain and channel change. Most channels will be able to pass the magnitude of flows increased from fire activities with relative ease though. The probability of there being erosion within the first year is relatively high and will decrease each year following burning of areas until they are negligible again as cover increase (Table 5). Sedimentation of channels has nearly the same probability of occurring as erosion (Table 5), but water quality would not likely be affected negatively from the proposed actions plus the foreseeable actions because no–ignition will occur within but only on the edges of riparian areas. Burn severities will likely be lower from prescribed rather than from wildfires. The potential for debris flows would be much lower from prescribed fire areas then from wildfires because of the likely lower burn severities within the drainages. There are fisheries within or just below the project areas, so there could be effects on fish.  The channels within the CEAs would most likely be able to handle the increase in peakflows, since the channels are hydrologically connected to their floodplains, and the banks and profile are stable. The no-ignition buffers except on edges of riparian areas will limit the amount of sediment making it into the stream. These decreases in water quality would not cause streams to be put on the State 303d list or lead to permanent degradation of the water quality. The sediment production and delivery would be less than from wildfires (Table 5) and would not likely affect diversion structures, or agricultural operations.  Reduction of vegetation and forest floor litter results from fire in decreases in interception and evapotranspiration, and infiltration rates. This means increased water becomes available for overland flow and stream runoff. Increased flows in turn lead to increased erosion and sedimentation (Zwolinski 2000). Prescribed fires (low and moderate severity) are designed so that vegetation remains in some form (wood, litter, and duff) to cover soils (Zwolinski 2000). Wildfires (high severity) have no plan or design to them and result in greater reduction in vegetation and soil cover that consequently leads to even greater amounts of stream runoff, erosion, and sedimentation. High severity fires, which may be greater due to past fire suppression activities, can lead to greater effects including water repellent soils since formation is dependent on heating temperatures and soil moisture (Robichaud 2000). Prescribed fires commonly occur during the spring and fall when soils are wetter and therefore, water repellency would be minimal which would lead to not as great of increases in water yield compared to wildfires (Robichaud 2000).  Cumulatively water quality is not expected to be degraded in streams enough to lead to listing on the 303d list from any of the proposed action alternatives. However, there could be temporary degradation of water in Lower Box Creek, and Manning Meadows Reservoirs that are currently listed on the 303d list. The degradation of the water would likely start to decrease conversely as vegetation is re-established following treatments and generally takes about 5 years to be reestablished. It is not expected to be major shifting of trophic state of the reservoirs though. The reservoirs were on improved trend over the last decade, and will likely again start to trend up again following treatment and improvement of the uplands in the watersheds. This project will be a balance of the need to treat uplands to likely prevent worse impacts from potential wildfires and to still manage the reservoirs.  Lower Box Creek Reservoir was constructed for irrigation use, and despite the listing on the 303d list only little action has been taken to otherwise change management on the reservoir. Actions by the Forest Service include implementing the Box Creek Project to improve or restore upland conditions to improve the water quality of the reservoirs. Additionally some gravelling of roads and closing of illegal ATV trails has taken place to try and aid improving water quality of the reservoirs.  Manning Meadow Reservoir is the uber-important brood stock of Bonneville cutthroat trout and thus managing the uplands is important at maintaining this important fishery. The Forest constructed wood fences in portions of the drainage to aid in improving the water quality of the reservoir and to prevent illegal ATV use around the reservoir. When the Marysvale Peak Fire occurred above Manning Meadow Reservoir the Forest implemented fencing the slope directly west of the reservoir and installed some silt fencing that aided in keeping sediment and nutrients out of the reservoir. Additionally, some gravelling of roads occurred in the vicinity to keep additional sediment and nutrients out of the reservoir. This project will be a balance of the need to treat uplands to likely prevent worse impacts from potential wildfires and to still manage the reservoir for the important fishery.  Soil productivity and the associated soil properties impacts should be kept to a minimal amount due to the Design Features/Mitigation Measures and BMPs for this project. There is a relationship between the amount of area disturbed and the amount of potential erosion, and thus minimizing the amount of disturbance is important. Streamside or riparian buffers are effective in capturing overland flows, removing sediment and nutrients, and aiding in maintaining stream temperature.  Riparian buffers, Mitigation Measures, BMPs will not likely protect all riparian functions during vegetation treatments; however, they will aid in the protection of the riparian areas and maintaining water quality from all the proposed actions at the landscape scale of this project. Site specific impacts might be more dramatic but again at the landscape scale are not expected to lead to drastic loss of riparian vegetation or function. As riparian vegetation re-establishes then riparian function will return in the areas where riparian areas may burn or be treated. Some of the effects of mechanical treatments include the impacts of landings, skid trails, and temporary road construction and obliteration of course and the effects of these are factored in to other resources impacts of this section.  If one of the four proposed action alternative were chosen, prescribed burning and mechanical activities would be implemented. The general type of effects of prescribed fire or mechanical treatments would not change for the most part by alternative. Mechanical treatments as proposed within the four potential action alternatives will not cause different affects because they are part of different alternatives. Same with prescribed fire that will have the same potential affects or impacts no matter which of the four alternatives is chosen. The only real change would be the acres on which each alternative will be proposed by alternative.  For example: Alternative 2 proposes about 8,187 acres of mechanical, 32,832 acres of fire for a total of about 41,019 acres across Monroe Mountain. Alternative 3 is proposing about 13, 643 acres mechanical and 31,195 acres fire for a total of about 44,838 acres. Alternative 4 proposes about 19,835 acres mechanical, 27,276 fire and total about 47,111 acres. Alternative 5 proposes about 15,074 acres mechanical, 26,191 fire and total about 41,265 acres.  Thus Alternative 2-8,187 acres, then Alternative 3-13,643 acres, then Alternative 5-15,074 acres, and then finally Alternative 4-19,835 acres would likely have the most approximate total impact from mechanical treatments based on the total number of approximate acres of Mechanical treatment being proposed at the landscape scale of Monroe Mountain. In addition, Alternative 5- 26,191 acres, then Alternative 4-27,276 acres, then Alternative 3-31,195 acres, and finally Alternative 2-32,832 acres would likely have the greatest impacts landscape wise from prescribed fire based on the total acres of fire being proposed.  There would be more specific changes based on the acres being treated within each HUC6 or CEA based on each action alternative of course. Tables 4 and 7, and Maps 1-4 should be used to visually compare the action alternatives to rank the effects of treatment type. In general, fire effects would likely be greater than mechanical treatments on an acre by acre comparison. So, based on Tables 4 and 7, and Maps 1-4, each action alternative might be less or more impactful depending on how each alternative either treats or does not treat acres and whether they are treated by fire or mechanical. There are too many variables or ranges of values that could happen by each alternative to categorically say which alternative would less or more impactful based on the HUC6 other than to say that I assumed mechanical treating an acre was the same impacts for each alternative and burning an acre was the same across alternatives to estimate impacts to watershed, soil, and hydrological resources. However, at the next level down or HUC6 or smaller, then an acre of burning was evaluated as likely having greater effects than an acre of mechanical treatment to compare drainages across alternatives. Comparing the no action alternative to the action alternatives is also difficult to predict impacts or what might happen other that the no-action alternative could be a range of less impactful for HUC6s that do not burn by wildfire but could also have greater impacts than from the action alternatives if portions of HUC6 drainages burned at higher proportions of high severities or burning in riparian areas that might not burn during the prescribed burning processes. Burn severities will likely be lower from prescribed fire rather than from wildfires. Region 4-The Intermountain Region of the Forest Service on average has had 15% of wildfires burn at high severity and 27% at moderate severity over the last 13 years; or 42% of wildland fire area are burning pretty hot (R4 Fire Averages from 2000-2013). Obviously the amount of high severity fire could be either less than or greater than average and would depend on a dynamic range of site specific conditions at the time of burning, and the subsequent watershed effects would depend on equally dynamic rain and weather events too.  It is likely that there will be negative effects to stream channels, or floodplains from the increased floods generated from some of the prescribed burned areas (Elliott et. al. 2010). However, most channels will be able to pass the magnitude of flows increased from fire activities with relative ease. The probabilities of there being erosion within the first year is relative and will decrease each year following burning of areas until they are negligible again as cover increases (Table 5). Sedimentation of channels has nearly the same probability of occurring as erosion (Table 5), but there will not be likely be effects on long term stream water quality from prescribed burns compared to if wildfire were to occur in the same area. Burn severities will likely be lower from prescribed rather than from wild fires. Region 4 on average has 15% of wildfires burn at high severity and 27% at moderate severity over the last 13 years; or 42% of wildland fire area are burning pretty hot (R4 Fire Averages from 2000-2013). It would be expected to have lower percentages than these from prescribed fire. The potential for debris flows and flooding would be much lower from prescribed fire areas then from wildfires because of the likely lower burn severities within the drainages. CLEAN WATER ACT  Army Corp Discharge, Dredge and Fill Permits The proposed treatments would not require any permits. No wetlands are being proposed for treatment within the analysis area that would be affected by the proposed actions.  Water Quality Limited Stream Segments There are no WQLS stream segments listed by the State of Utah within the project or analysis area. None are expected to be after implementation of the proposed action. There are two waterbodies listed on the approved 303d list and include Manning Meadow and Lower Box Creek Reservoirs that could in the short term be affected by the proposed actions. In the long term they are not expected to have water quality impacts from the proposed actions beyond a couple of years following treatment.  Antidegradation Policy for Beneficial Uses More frequent and less severe wildfires historically occurred within the assessment area. The proposed actions would introduce this type of fire process into the assessment area with some control. Thus, it is not anticipated that the beneficial uses would be degraded by application of the proposed actions. In fact, the results of the proposed actions will likely restore watersheds to function and limit impacts on hydrological values into the future.  The action alternatives would be compliant with the Clean Water Act, Executive Order 11988, and Executive Order 11990.  After this analysis was completed, an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory (NA and PFA) was found in the Indian Peak area. Approximately 310 acres of the NA and PFA overlap this aspen project. The removal of these 310 acres for treatment will not change the overall conclusions of this report on soil and water resources and the conclusions above are still valid at the project scale. Removal of these acres will lessen the effects in the drainages, where these acres are located, on soil and water resources. These 310 acres are a small percentage of the overall acres being proposed for treatment. References Cited Cannon, S., Gartner, J., Holland-Sears, A., Thurston, B., Gleason, J. 2003. Debris-flow response of basins burned by the 2002 Coal Seam and Missionary Ridge Fires, Colorado. In Boyer, D.D.,  Elliot, William J. et al. 2000. Disturbed WEPP-Draft 02/2000-WEPP Interface for disturbed forest and range runoff, erosion, and sediment delivery. USDA Forest Service-Rocky Mountain Research Station and San Dimas Technology and Development Center. http://forest.moscowfsl.wsu.edu/fswepp/docs/distweppdoc.html  Elliott, William J. and Hall, David E. 1999. WEPP:Road (Draft 12/1999). WEPP Interface for Predicting Forest Road Runoff, Erosion and Sediment Delivery.  Elliot, William J.; Miller, Ina Sue; Audin, Lisa. Eds. 2010. Cumulative watershed effects of fuel management in the western United States. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-231. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 299 p.  Final_NF_Box_Creek_Oldroyd_Fire_Monitoring_Rep_02.doc. Results of the Oldroyd Wildfire- North Fork of Box Creek-Aquatic Resources and Straw Wattle Treatment Effectiveness Monitoring. (2000-2002). Whelan, James E. (Joint State and Forest Fisheries Biologist). Monitoring report of water quality data, stream conditions, macroinvertebrates, fish, Boreal toads, and Burned Area Emergency Rehabilitation (BAER) treatment effectiveness that compares both pre and post Oldroyd wildfire conditions for North Fork of Box Creek. (FLRMP) Forest Land Resources Management Plan 1986. USDA Forest Service. Intermountain region.  Lane, E.W., 1955. ”Design of Stable Channels”, trans. ASCE, 120: 1234-1279.  Manning Meadows Reservoir. 2008. Limnological Assessment of Water Quality. Joint U.S. Forest Service and State of Utah-Department of Water Quality report funded by the EPA. http://www.waterquality.utah.gov/TMDL/Manning_Meadows_Reservoir_Assessment.pdf Mayer, P.M., S.K. Reynolds, M.D. McCutchen, and T.J. Canfield. Riparian buffer width, vegetative cover, and nitrogen removal effectiveness: A review of current science and regulations. EPA/600/R-05/118. Cincinnati, OH, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2006.  Monroe Mountain. USDA Forest Service. Richfield Ranger District-Monroe Mountains- Geology. Andrew E. Godfrey-former Fishlake National Forest Geologist. Unknown date. The complete write-up is incorporated into this report.  Nonpoint Source Management Plan-Silvicultural Activities. 2001. State of Utah. NPS Task Force. http://www.waterquality.utah.gov/documents/NPS_Mgmt_Plan_2001.pdf See Silvilculture Program.  North_fork_box_creek_pre_postfire_wq.xls. Whelan, James E. Excel Spreadsheet is located on the hydrologist c.d. in the project file. See also Final_NF_Box_Creek_Oldroyd_Fire_Monitoring_Rep_02.doc.  NWS. 2007. National Weather Service HDSC Precipitation Frequency Data Server (PFDS) Utah Precipitation Frequency Estimates. NOAA Atlas 14. http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/sa/ut_pfds.html Precipitation Frequency Data Server (PFDS) - UTAH  Oldroyd_2003observations.doc. 2003. Oldroyd wildfire BAER treatment effectiveness monitoring report and photographs written by Dale Deiter (Forest Hydrologist).  Robichaud, Peter R. 2000. Forest Fire Effects on Hillslope Erosion: What we Know. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Moscow, Idaho. http://www.watershed.org/news/win_00/2_hillslope_fire.htm  State of Utah 303(d) list of impaired waters. 2006. Impaired Water Bodies or Utah’s 2006 303(d) list of waters. Utah DEQ-DWQ. http://www.waterquality.utah.gov/documents/200_303d_submittal_3-31-06.pdf  USACE 1987. US Army Corps of Engineers. 1987. Corps of Engineers wetlands delineation manual. Wetlands Research Program Technical Report Y-87-1. US Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Missouri. http://el.erdc.usace.army.mil/elpubs/pdf/wlman87.pdf  UDWQ 2011. Utah Department of Environmental Quality. 2011. Utah Approved TMDL plans and other TMDL reports and assessments. http://www.waterquality.utah.gov/TMDL/index.htm  UDWQ 2011b. Utah Department of Environmental Quality. 2011. Site accessing the State of Utah-Source Protection Coverage using the Programs/Services Button. http://www.drinkingwater.utah.gov/. UDWQ 2011c. Utah Department of Environmental Quality. 2011. Site accessing the Source Water Protection information for the State. http://www.deq.utah.gov/ProgramsServices/programs/water/sourceprotection/ USDA Forest Service. April 2012. Technical Guide-FS-9990a- National Best Management Practices for Water Quality Management on National Forest Service Lands. Volume 1: National Core BMP Technical Guide. http://www.fs.fed.us/biology/resources/pubs/watershed/FS_National_Core_BMPs_April2012.pd f  Utah Lakes and Reservoirs. 2007. Utah DEQ-DWQ. State website with watershed and water quality information for numerous lakes and reservoirs. http://waterquality.utah.gov/watersheds/lakes.htm , For Lower Box Creek, Barney Lake, Big Lake and Manning Meadow Reservoirs.  Zwolinski, Malcolm J. 2000. The role of fire in management of watershed responses. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-13. http://www.fs.fed.us/rm/pubs/rmrs_p013/rmrs_p013_367_370.pdf Appendix K – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Inventoried Roadless & Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas Specialist Report (Christensen 2015a)   Prepared by:  Dave A. Christensen Fishlake Forest Recreation Specialist  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 3, 2015      Executive Summary The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. The area affected by the proposal includes Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits.  This report considers potential effects to wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics as a result of the no action and four action alternatives of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. The five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) located in the project area presently average low to moderate ratings for the six wilderness qualities or attributes. The southern portion of the Signal Peak IRA is the best area that seems to hold the potential for manageability as a wilderness area. Alternatives 2-5 would leave stumps mostly flush with the ground and a burned appearance. No roads would be constructed, no clear cuts, control lines feathered and reclaimed, sensitive areas would be avoided and timing restrictions imposed as proposed. The proposed actions would only temporarily reduce the qualities or attributes and characteristics until the vegetation grows and improves over a period of about three to five years. Stumps and burned vegetation may be noticeable for a longer time period. Alternatives 2-5 (including mechanical options 1 & 2) would take place without permanently lowering the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change. The five draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) located within the project area presently only average moderate to low ratings for the six wilderness qualities or attributes. The southern portion of the Signal Peak draft UUA is an area that appears to hold the best potential for manageability as a wilderness area. Effects to the draft UUAs would be the same as for the IRAs with the exception of 0.3 miles of temporary road being constructed in alternative 4, and 1.3 miles of temporary road being constructed in alternative 5. These roads would be reclaimed after use and would only temporarily reduce the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change. The implementation of best management practices such as no new road construction in IRA and little road construction in UUA, reclaiming control lines, reclaiming the temporary roads in UUA, and cutting stumps mostly flush with the ground would manage the IRAs and draft UUAs in a way that would not permanently lower and may over time enhance the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics from their present condition. Cumulatively, changes at the total project management area level are relatively small. The magnitude of the changes combined with past, present and reasonable foreseeable actions resulted in less than a 30% change from existing conditions, overall. Based upon my findings, I conclude the action alternatives would meet the purpose and need, and that the changes would move conditions closer to desired conditions. Wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics would remain the same or may even improve over time. No action would result in not moving toward the desired conditions in the foreseeable future. Wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics would remain the same or may even decrease over time. Introduction Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. Of these 175,706 acres, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres on Monroe Mountain. Soil survey information was used to estimate the historic occurrence of aspen. It is widely recognized that aspen ecosystems are capable of supporting one of the largest arrays of plant and animal species due to its high productivity and structural diversity. However, it is also widely recognized that aspen ecosystems have been in decline throughout the Intermountain West during the twentieth century.  On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to, (1) conifer encroachment due to reduced fire, and (2) lack of recruitment due to domestic and wild browsing by cattle, sheep, elk, and deer. Reduced occurrences of wildland fire due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and overbrowsing by domestic and wild browsers have been identified by the District as the primary underlying causes for aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain being at risk. Aspen of 5 to 15 feet in height (“recruitment”) are uncommon on Monroe Mountain, despite continued sprouting of aspen (“regeneration”). Due to high cost and continual maintenance, fencing is not a long-term sustainable response option for protecting aspen sprouts from overbrowsing, and does not address underlying causes of the lack of recruitment.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain. Aspen ecosystems support the highest level of biodiversity for interior western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e., 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. Mechanical treatments can also be an effective disturbance tool for aspen restoration. Regulatory Framework The Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (UDSA 1986) does not provide desired conditions, goals, or standards and guidelines to specifically address or maintain roadless character. However, some of the lands initially inventoried as roadless during the RAREII process were allocated in a way coincident to generally maintaining potential wilderness characteristics, i.e., research natural areas (RNA), critical wildlife winter range or habitat, and semi-primitive non-motorized areas. Other lands also inventoried earlier as roadless have been managed in ways that allowed road construction and other development such as timber harvest. Pursuant to RARE II of 1979 and incorporated into The Roadless Area Conservation Rule of 2001 (RACR), 36 CFR Part 294, the Fishlake National Forest identified areas having pristine, sensitive, and roadless characteristics as IRAs to prevent the fragmentation of these areas by new road construction or improvements. IRAs represent some of the largest and most extensive tracts of undeveloped land on the Fishlake National Forest and are valued for their roadless nature, undeveloped values, and associated environmental characteristics and attributes.  Pursuant to prior NFMA implementing regulations at 36 CFR 219.17 (as published in 36 CFR 200 to 299 [July 1, 2000 edition]), the Fishlake National Forest created an inventory of draft unroaded/undeveloped areas as part of Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) revision efforts. The LRMP revision has not yet been completed for the Fishlake National Forest; however, the information represents the latest inventory data for areas with potential wilderness qualities or attributes. The 2005 draft inventories of unroaded/undeveloped areas were based on direction in the Intermountain Region Planning Desk Guide: A Protocol for Identifying and Evaluating Areas for Potential Wilderness (USFS 2004). There is no policy, law, or directive guiding the management of identified draft unroaded/undeveloped areas that lie outside of IRAs or wilderness areas; therefore, the only guidance for these areas is general forest or management area direction in the current Fishlake LRMP. The term “undeveloped area” refers to a geographic area usually of at least 5,000 acres, without developed and maintained roads, and substantially natural.  The review provided in this document addresses potential effects to wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless area characteristics from the no action and proposed action alternatives of the Project. Resource Issues and Purpose and Need  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described below and in the EIS. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to:  • Improving and increasing the amount of habitat for wildlife species dependent upon aspen ecosystems (i.e., mule deer, elk, and Northern goshawk); • Improving and increasing the amount of habitat and forage for domestic ungulates (i.e., cattle and sheep); • Improving native species diversity; • Reducing hazardous fuel accumulations; • Reducing the risk for large-scale, intense wildland fires. This results in lower risk to the safety of the public and firefighters. This also results in lower risk to sensitive wildlife species (i.e. Northern goshawk, Western Boreal toad (Bufo boreas), and Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)); and, • Increasing the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (Utah Fire Plan 2001).  The interdisciplinary team reviewed the scoping comments from public individuals, interest groups, local governments, and other agencies, to develop a list of issues to address. The issues were separated into two groups: key and non-key issues. Key issues were defined as those directly or indirectly caused by implementing the proposed action. Non-key issues were identified as those: (1) Addressed through LRMP or implementation of LRMP standards and guidelines and best management practices; (2) Addressed through implementation of projectspecific mitigation measures/design features; (3) Addressed during processes or analyses routinely conducted by an interdisciplinary team; (4) Addressed through spatial location of activities during alternative design; (5) Beyond the scope of the project; or (6) general comment. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA regulations explain these delineations in Sec. 1501.7, “…identify, and eliminate from detailed study the issues which are not significant or which have been covered by prior environmental review (Sec. 1506.3)…” A list of non-key issues and reasons regarding their categorization as non-significant is in the project record. Following are the key issues identified by the public and used to focus the analysis or drive alternative development.  Key Issues:  • Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation. • Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property. • Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced. • Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded. • Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen sprouts post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. • Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (2 or more growing seasons). • Project activities may result in adverse impacts old growth characteristics. Overview of the Proposed Action The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues, and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments (see chapter 2 of the EIS for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative).  Addressing the reduced occurrence of wildland fire due to an increase in wildland fire suppression on Monroe Mountain is critical to the long-term restoration of aspen ecosystems. The average fire return intervals for each of the vegetation cover types occurring on Monroe Mountain can be found in chapter 1 of the EIS. This table also shows that the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch DBH, using group, and singletree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years. This number is well within the Forest Service recommended range of area to treat within a 5-year period of 5,000 to 24,000 acres (see chapter 2 of the EIS for a detailed description of the proposed action and alternatives).  Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the alternative (see chapter 2 of the EIS for specific road locations, mileage, and specifications). In addition, temporary fencing would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (see chapter 2 of the EIS for fencing locations, mileage, and specifications).  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management). See chapter 2 of the EIS for a detailed description of the District’s proposal to address overbrowsing of aspen. Affected Environment Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) represent some of the largest and most extensive tracts of undeveloped land; having pristine, sensitive, and roadless characteristics (USFS 1976). Theoretically, to be classified as an IRA, areas must not contain constructed roads and generally are at least 5,000 acres. A roadless area is also defined as an area that meets the minimum criteria for wilderness. The Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project includes five IRAs that may be affected. These include Signal Peak, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Tibidore and Langdon. These five IRAs cover a total 86,366 acres which is 49 percent of the project area for the EIS. Within these IRAs there are many examples of modern human control, manipulation, and civilization in the form of structures, roads (including constructed roads) and other evidence of occupation. The experience of solitude and primitive unconfined recreation is hard to find due to motorized roads and trails, private land developments, dams, waterlines, ditches, relatively skinny strips of IRA, mining, range improvements, and timber harvest. There are beautiful landscape features and views of the surrounding valleys. Only the south portion of the Signal Peak IRA seems to hold a reasonable opportunity for manageability as wilderness due to its size and roadless characteristics (see Map 1).  Map 1: Existing Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) and Acreages on Monroe Mountain    Within the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project area there are also five draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (USFS 2004b; UUAs) of the same names and general locations as the five IRAs. These areas represent the latest draft inventory data for areas with potential wilderness qualities or attributes. The term “undeveloped area” refers to a geographic area usually of at least 5,000 acres, without developed and maintained roads, and substantially natural. There is no policy, law, or directive guiding the management of identified draft unroaded/ undeveloped areas that lie outside of IRAs or wilderness areas. These five draft UUAs cover a total of 92,854 acres which is 53 percent of the project area for the EIS. Within these draft UUAs there are many examples of modern human control, manipulation, and civilization in the form of structures, roads and other evidence of occupation. The experience of solitude and primitive unconfined recreation is hard to find due to motorized roads and trails, private land developments, dams, waterlines, ditches, relatively skinny strips of draft UUA, mining, range improvements, and power lines. There are beautiful landscape features and views of the surrounding valleys. Only the south portion of the Signal Peak draft UUA seems to hold a reasonable opportunity for manageability as wilderness due to its size and roadless characteristics (see Map 2).   Map 2 on the following page displays the existing Monroe Mountain draft UUAs and their associated acreages.                                 Map 2: Existing Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) and Acreages on Monroe Mountain       The following tables (1-8) describe the existing conditions of the IRAs and draft UUAs on Monroe Mountain. Table 1: Existing Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) General Descriptions on Monroe Mountain (USFS 1983)  Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Total Acres 30,870 11,472 22,611 9,261 12,152 % Project Area 18% 7% 13% 5% 7% Location Northwest Northeast Middle West Southwest Southeast Area Description Very irregular in shape with six less than 2 mile wide strips and a larger south central area of 7 by 5 miles Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 10 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 14 miles long Irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 . miles wide and 7 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 8 miles long Adjacent Lands to the West Private, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest BLM, State, National Forest National Forest Adjacent Lands to the East Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest National Forest Private, State, BLM  Table 2: Existing Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area (UUA) General Descriptions on Monroe Mountain  Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Total Acres 29,900 9,529 27,168 8,074 18,183 % Project Area 17% 5% 15% 5% 10% Location Northwest Northeast Middle West Southwest Southeast Area Description Very irregular in shape with a long less than 3 mile wide area and a larger south central area of 6 by 5 miles Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 2 miles wide and 7 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 4 miles wide and 16 miles long Irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 5 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 13 miles long Adjacent Lands to the West Private, State, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest BLM, State, National Forest National Forest Adjacent Lands to the East Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest National Forest State, Private, BLM, National Forest  Table 3: Existing IRA System Roads and Trails System Routes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Level 2 Roads (Open to all vehicles, yet may be very rough) About 4 miles #1209, #2700, #1211, #1148, #080, #288, #068 #1150, #2037 About 4 miles #2004, #1159, #1160, #166 About 4. miles #075, #1185, #1187, #1188, #1189, #1194, #1230, #182 About 1. miles #1782, #1196, #1197, #200 About 1. miles #1809, #1202 Level 1 Roads (Administative use only) About 5. miles #168, #170, #171, #172, #810 About . mile Little Creek   About 2 miles Dead Horse Rock Canyon Trails Open to All Vehicles About . mile #762, #984, #932 About . mile #911, #912, #909, #910 About 2 miles #915, #919, #920 #916, #917, #918 #922, #924, #992 #926, #925 About . mile #941 About 1/16 mile #971 60” Motorized Trails About 4. miles #950, #956, #763 #763A, #955, #761, #762, #761A, #761B About . mile #913 About . mile #812, #814, #923  About 5 miles #868, PST63 50” Motorized Trails About 2 miles PST 66 About 7. miles #764, #767 #260, #807, #793, Paiute 01 About 12 miles PST65, #088, #088A, #088B, #088C, #088D, #194, #837, #840 #841, #842, #833 #834, #843, #835 #845, #898, #969  About 2 miles #250, #859, #856 Total Miles of System Roads and Trails  16 . Miles  12 . Miles  19 Miles  2 Miles  10.5 Miles  Table 4: Existing IRA Non System Roads Non-System Roads Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Closed roads that still have a constructed footprint on the ground About 3. miles Norton Creek Bertelson Can. Nielson Can. Signal Peak About 3 miles Kinney Spring Little Creek East Hunter Flat About 2. miles Live Oak Bean Hill Manning Cr. Straight Can. Dry Canyon About 2 miles Tuft Draw Buck Hollow Hell Hole   Table 5: Existing Draft UUA System Roads and Trails System Routes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Level 2 Roads (Open to all vehicles, yet may be very rough) About . mile #1209, #2700 About . mile #1159   About . mile #068X, #082B Level 1 Roads (Administative use only)  About . mile Little Creek    Trails Open to All Vehicles      60” Motorized Trails About 1 mile #763, #103, #761 #761A, #763A    About 3 miles PST63 50” Motorized Trails About 2 miles PST 66 About 4 miles #260, #807, #793 About 14 miles PST65, #088, #088A, #088B, #088C, #088D, #815A, #815B, #194, #837, #840 #841, #842, #833 #834, #843, #835 #089, #898, #969  About 9 miles #250, #859, #853, #852, PST53, PST53A, PST33, #856 Total Miles of System Roads and Trails  3 . Miles  5 Miles  14 Miles    12 . Miles  Table 6: Existing Draft UUA Non System Roads Non-System Roads Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Closed roads that still have a constructed footprint on the ground About 4 miles Red Butte Can. Thompson Cr. Winget Can. Bertelson Can. Order Dugway Nielson Can. About 3 miles Kinney Spring Little Creek East Hunter Flat About 3 miles Oak Flat Live Oak Dry Canyon Manning Cr. Straight Can. Bean Hill About 1 mile Tuft Draw   Table 7: Existing IRA Human Developments and Structures  Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Range Improvements Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines, tanks and fences Culinary Water Developments Norton Creek Monroe Creek     Irrigation Water Developments Serviceberry Cr. Koosharem Can. Anderson Can. Flat Canyon   Waterlines and Pipelines Norton Creek Monroe Canyon Koosharem Can. Anderson Can. Flat Can.   Dams Annabella Res. Deep Lake Washburn Res.  Hunts Lake (Upper & Lower)   Ditches Deep Lake Annabella  Hunts Lake Manning Creek Concrete   Timber Harvest Monument Peak Annabella Cove Mtn. Monroe Peak Whooton Spr. Doe Flat Dry Creek Nielson Can. Collins Creek Big Flat Aspen Langdon Dry Lake Langdon Erosion Control Terracing Thompson Basin  Live Oak Hunts Lake Monroe Peak Anderson Can.   Mining Bertelson Can  Manning Creek Durkee Sprs Miners Ridge Windy Ridge Tibidore Can.  Fire Annabella Flat  Marysvale Peak Blackbird Mine   Prescribed Fire Monument Peak Kinney Spring Little Table Bean Hill Tuft Draw Buck Hollow Deer Spring Tibidore Pond Rock Canyon Pine Canyon Jackie Canyon Schaffers Other Mud Lake Cabin  Old Monrovian Park Rec Site Blue Peak  Brushsaw work Nielson Can. Sawmills & Piles  Windy Ridge Cabins, Barn, etc  Manning Cr. Old Tunnel (100’)       Table 8: Existing Draft UUA Human Developments and Structures  Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Range Improvements Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines, tanks and fences Culinary Water Developments Red Butte Creek Norton Creek Monroe Canyon     Irrigation Water Developments Maple Canyon     Waterlines and Pipelines Maple Canyon Red Butte Creek Norton Creek Monroe Canyon 1st Left Hand Cr.     Dams Washburn Res.     Ditches  Mill Creek to Little Creek Manning Creek Concrete   Timber Harvest   Sawmill Flat   Erosion Control Terracing Thompson Basin   Live Oak Hunts Lake Monroe Peak Anderson Can.   Mining Bertelson Can.  Manning Creek Miners Ridge Windy Ridge Tibidore Can.  Fire Annabella Flat  Marysvale Peak Blackbird Mine   Prescribed Fire Thompson Basin Monument Peak Kinney Spring   Rock Canyon Pine Canyon Jackie Canyon Other Mud Lake Cabin  Old Monrovian Park Rec Site  Neilson Can. Sawmills & Piles  Windy Ridge Cabins, Barn, etc  Manning Cr. Old Tunnel (100’)            Table 9: Existing IRA Wilderness Quality or Attributes The Overall Ratings are taken from the RAREII Evaluation of Roadless Areas (USFS 1979) Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Untrammeled - This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails dams, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, mining, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, cabins, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Untrammeled Overall Rating Moderate Low Moderate Moderate Low Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails dams, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, cabins, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Natural Overall Rating Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Low Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation; it is essentially without permanent improvements or modern human occupation. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails dams, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern human presence or occupation: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Undeveloped Overall Rating Moderate Moderate High High Moderate Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, dams, waterlines, timber harvest, range improvements, erosion control terracing, and an irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 5%), Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 5%) and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 90%). The southern portion contains a larger continuous land area that is Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized which could allow for solitude. Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, waterlines, timber harvest, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 40%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 60%). Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, dams, waterlines, mining, timber harvest, range improvements, cabins, erosion control terracing, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 10%), Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 40%) and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 50%).  Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 50%), and Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized (about 50%).  Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, waterlines, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 10%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 90%).  Solitude Overall Rating Moderate Low Moderate Low Low Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) Relatively insignificant cultural resources are present. There are no potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. Special Feature Overall Rating Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Low Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. The IRA is 30,870 acres and very irregular in shape. Only the southern portion contains a larger continuous land area resulting in a configuration that is possibly manageable as wilderness. It has moderate ratings for untrammeled, natural, undeveloped, solitude, and special features. The IRA is 11,472 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has moderate ratings for natural, undeveloped, and special features plus a low ratings for untrammeled and solitude.  The IRA is 22,611 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for undeveloped and moderate ratings for untrammeled, natural, solitude, and special features.  The IRA is 9,261 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for undeveloped, moderate ratings for untrammeled, natural, and special features plus a low rating for solitude. The IRA is 12,152 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has low ratings for untrammeled, natural, solitude and for special features plus a moderate rating for undeveloped.  Manageability Overall Rating Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Low Table 10: Existing IRA Roadless Characteristics Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Municipal source protection zones occur in Red Butte, Norton and Monroe Canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. A municipal source protection zone occurs in Koosharem Canyon. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are public drinking water systems and sources in Norton and Monroe Canyons. Municipal source protection zones are in Red Butte, Norton, and Monroe Canyons. There are no developed drinking water systems. A municipal source protection zone is in Koosharem Canyon.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 90% of the IRA is in the Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized ROS class, with about 5% of the IRA in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 60% of the IRA is in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 40% of the IRA is in the Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized ROS class, with about 50% of the IRA in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 50% of the IRA is in the Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 90% of the IRA is in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential. Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. The desired scenic integrity is 90% high with 10% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 50% high and 50% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 75% high and 25% moderate The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 100% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 50% high and 50% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. Cultural resources are present; however, they are relatively insignificant lithic scatters. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. There are no known significant archeological sites. There are no known significant archeological sites. Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibidore IRA Langdon IRA Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding and hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various streams, wildlife, and meadows. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding, hunting and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various streams, wildlife, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various streams, wildlife, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding.                      Table 11: Existing Draft UUA Wilderness Quality or Attributes The Overall Ratings are taken from the2004 Fishlake National Forest Draft Undeveloped Area Evaluation Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Untrammeled - This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, mining, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Untrammeled Overall Rating Medium Medium Medium Medium Low Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Natural Overall Rating High Medium High High Medium Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation; it is essentially without permanent improvements or modern human occupation. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Undeveloped Overall Rating Medium Low Medium Medium Low Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, waterlines, range improvements, erosion control terracing, and an irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 6%), Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 4%) and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 90%). The southern portion contains a larger continuous land area that is Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized which could allow for solitude. Solitude is very limited due to a few motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 35%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 65%). Solitude is very limited due to motorized trails, adjacent private developments, mining, range improvements, erosion control terracing, cabins, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 10%), Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 45%) and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 45%). Solitude is very limited due to mining, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 40%), and Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized (about 60%). Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, waterlines, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations of Roaded Natural (about 5%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 95%). Solitude Overall Rating Medium Medium Medium Low Low Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. Bonneville Cutthroat trout in Manning Creek. There are no potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. Special Feature Overall Rating Low Low Medium Low Low Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. The UUA is 29,900 acres and very irregular in shape. Only the southern portion contains a larger continuous land area resulting in a configuration that is possibly manageable as wilderness. It has a high rating for natural; medium for untrammeled, undeveloped, and solitude; and low for special features. The UUA is 9,529 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has medium ratings for untrammeled, natural, and solitude; and low for undeveloped and special features.  The UUA is 27,168 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for natural; and medium ratings for untrammeled, undeveloped, solitude, and special features.  The UUA is 8,074 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for natural; moderate ratings for untrammeled, undeveloped; and low ratings for solitude and special features. The UUA is 18,183 acres and very irregular in shape and would be very difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a medium rating for natural; and low ratings for untrammeled, undeveloped, solitude and special features.  Manageability Overall Rating Medium Low Medium Medium Low Table 12: Existing Draft UUA Roadless Characteristics Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Municipal source protection zones occur in Red Butte, Norton and Monroe Canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. A municipal source protection zone occurs in Koosharem Canyon.  Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are public drinking water systems, sources, and source protection zones in Norton, Red Butte, and Monroe Canyons. There are no developed drinking water systems. A municipal source protection zone is in Koosharem Canyon. There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports  Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports:  Sensitive species: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) - Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) - Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus) See Specialist Reports  Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 90% of the UUA is in the Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized ROS class, with about 4% of the UUA in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 65% of the UUA is in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 45% of the UUA is in the Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized ROS class, with about 45% of the UUA in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 60% of the UUA is in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 95% of the UUA is in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential. Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. The desired scenic integrity is 95% high with 5% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 50% high and 50% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 65% high and 35% moderate The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 100% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 40% high and 60% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. Cultural resources are present; however, they are relatively insignificant lithic scatters. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. There are no known significant archeological sites. There are no known significant archeological sites. Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibidore UUA Langdon UUA Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding and hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various streams, wildlife, and meadows. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding, hunting and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various streams, wildlife, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area include various streams, wildlife, meadows and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding.   Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Alternatives:  No Action Alternative (Alternative 1):  The No Action Alternative represents the existing condition described in the previous pages and in the EIS. This alternative would maintain the status quo and conditions on the ground would not measurably change in respect to wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics. Aspen restoration would not take place except by wildfires and natural succession. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Generally all existing activities would continue. Recreation activities including hunting, fishing, hiking, driving, and off-road vehicle use on designated routes, would continue and are relatively non-impacting. Cattle grazing, with maintenance of associated range improvements such as fences and water developments, would occur. Dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. These activities are not anticipated to impact the existing wilderness quality or attributes and roadless characteristics.   The present qualities or attributes of wilderness; Untrammeled, Natural Integrity, Appearance, Remoteness, Solitude, Special Features, and Manageability, as well as the characteristics of Inventoried Roadless Areas; Soil, water and air, Sources of public drinking water, Diversity of plant and animal communities, Habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed and candidate, and sensitive species and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land, Primitive, semi-primitive non-motorized, and semi-primitive motorized classes of recreation opportunities, Reference landscapes, Landscape character and scenic integrity, Traditionally cultural properties and sacred sites, and Other locally identified unique characteristics, would remain affected primarily by natural processes.  Alternatives 2-5:  Alternatives 2-5 within Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs): Would include mechanical and prescribed fire activities to meet the purpose and need of aspen restoration. Mechanical (2 options) treatments would occur in the four action alternatives as well as prescribed fire. No new access roads or temporary roads would be required within the IRAs. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Trees would be cut as close to the ground as possible. Access for mechanical treatments would be existing roads and/or cross country by tracked vehicles.  IRA Analysis table 13 shows the total acres of each IRA. Next is shown the proposed acres within each alternative being treated by mechanical and prescribed fire, plus the percentage of the IRA being treated by mechanical and by prescribed fire as well as the total percent of the combined treated acres. Note that 60% or less is actually being burned across the landscape. Therefore, the result of 60% being treated is the number shown in the Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) column.         Table 13: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project – IRA Analysis   Alt. 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3   Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) Total IRA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Langdon 12,152 0 42 0% 490 4% 4% 223 2% 514 4% 6% Little Creek 11,472 0 327 3% 1,569 14% 17% 1,422 12% 1,088 10% 22% Marysvale Peak 22,611 0 217 1% 4,024 18% 19% 925 4% 4,008 18% 22% Signal Peak 30,870 0 862 3% 8,095 26% 29% 2,439 8% 7,631 25% 33% Tibadore 9,261 0 61 1% 1,201 13% 14% 122 1% 1,237 13% 15% All IRAs Combined 83,366 0 1,509 2% 15,379 18% 20% 5,131 6% 14,478 17% 23%   Table 13: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project – IRA Analysis (Continued)   Alt. 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5   Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) Total IRA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Langdon 12,152 0 278 2% 514 4% 6% 317 3% 324 3% 6% Little Creek 11,472 0 2,142 19% 737 6% 25% 1,228 11% 1,028 9% 20% Marysvale Peak 22,611 0 1,637 7% 3,747 17% 24% 1,517 7% 3,356 15% 22% Signal Peak 30,870 0 5,009 16% 6,396 21% 37% 3,478 11% 6,633 22% 33% Tibadore 9,261 0 196 2% 1,237 13% 15% 317 3% 1,047 11% 14% All IRAs Combined 83,366 0 9,262 11% 12,632 15% 26% 6,857 8% 12,388 14% 22%  Table 14: IRA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 2 by Vegetation Type Alternative 2 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Seral Aspen 42 Langdon Total 42 Little Creek Seral Aspen 173 Spruce-Fir 11 Stable Aspen 143 Little Creek Total 327 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 144 Spruce-Fir 48 Stable Aspen 25 Marysvale Peak Total 217 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 304 Spruce-Fir 359 Stable Aspen 197 Signal Peak Total 862 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 5 Seral Aspen 53 Stable Aspen 2 Tibadore Total 61 GRAND TOTAL 1,509         Alternative 2 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 352 Spruce-Fir 11 Stable Aspen 1 Langdon Total 490 Little Creek Seral Aspen 951 Spruce-Fir 22 Stable Aspen 596 Little Creek Total 1,569 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 371 Seral Aspen 2,096 Spruce-Fir 451 Stable Aspen 1,106 Marysvale Peak Total 4,024 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,254 Seral Aspen 2,671 Spruce-Fir 2,169 Stable Aspen 2,001 Signal Peak Total 8,095 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 198 Seral Aspen 880 Spruce-Fir 63 Stable Aspen 60 Tibadore Total 1,201 GRAND TOTAL 15,379 Table 15: IRA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 3 by Vegetation Type Alternative 3 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Seral Aspen 223 Langdon Total 223 Little Creek Seral Aspen 1,018 Spruce-Fir 46 Stable Aspen 359 Little Creek Total 1,422 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 692 Spruce-Fir 164 Stable Aspen 69 Marysvale Peak Total 925 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 913 Spruce-Fir 1,202 Stable Aspen 323 Signal Peak Total 2,439 Tibadore Seral Aspen 103 Stable Aspen 18 Tibadore Total 122 GRAND TOTAL 5,131          Alternative 3 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 376 Spruce-Fir 11 Stable Aspen 1 Langdon Total 514 Little Creek Seral Aspen 573 Spruce-Fir 8 Stable Aspen 507 Little Creek Total 1,088 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 371 Seral Aspen 2,098 Spruce-Fir 428 Stable Aspen 1,111 Marysvale Peak Total 4,008 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,254 Seral Aspen 2,477 Spruce-Fir 1,888 Stable Aspen 2,012 Signal Peak Total 7,631 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 200 Seral Aspen 912 Spruce-Fir 63 Stable Aspen 62 Tibadore Total 1,237 GRAND TOTAL 14,478 Table 16: IRA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 4 by Vegetation Type Alternative 4 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Seral Aspen 278 Langdon Total 278 Little Creek Seral Aspen 1,448 Spruce-Fir 62 Stable Aspen 632 Little Creek Total 2,142 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 1,086 Spruce-Fir 425 Stable Aspen 125 Marysvale Peak Total 1,637 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 11 Seral Aspen 1,779 Spruce-Fir 2,213 Stable Aspen 1,006 Signal Peak Total 5,009 Tibadore Seral Aspen 177 Stable Aspen 18 Tibadore Total 196 GRAND TOTAL 9,262          Alternative 4 – Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 376 Spruce-Fir 11 Stable Aspen 1 Langdon Total 514 Little Creek Seral Aspen 380 Spruce-Fir 8 Stable Aspen 349 Little Creek Total 737 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 371 Seral Aspen 1,978 Spruce-Fir 314 Stable Aspen 1,084 Marysvale Peak Total 3,747 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,248 Seral Aspen 2,122 Spruce-Fir 1,391 Stable Aspen 1,635 Signal Peak Total 6,396 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 200 Seral Aspen 912 Spruce-Fir 63 Stable Aspen 62 Tibadore Total 1,237 GRAND TOTAL 12,632 Table 17: IRA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 5 by Vegetation Type Alternative 5 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Stable Aspen 2 Seral Aspen 315 Langdon Total 317 Little Creek Seral Aspen 809 Spruce-Fir 35 Stable Aspen 384 Little Creek Total 1,228 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 847 Spruce-Fir 340 Stable Aspen 331 Marysvale Peak Total 1,517 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 1,444 Spruce-Fir 1,405 Stable Aspen 628 Signal Peak Total 3,478 Tibadore Seral Aspen 290 Stable Aspen 27 Tibadore Total 317 GRAND TOTAL 6,857 Alternative 5 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 187 Spruce-Fir 11 Langdon Total 324 Little Creek Seral Aspen 569 Spruce-Fir 8 Stable Aspen 451 Little Creek Total 1,028 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 372 Seral Aspen 1,736 Spruce-Fir 320 Stable Aspen 928 Marysvale Peak Total 3,356 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,255 Seral Aspen 1,999 Spruce-Fir 1,579 Stable Aspen 1,800 Signal Peak Total 6,633 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 200 Seral Aspen 738 Spruce-Fir 63 Stable Aspen 46 Tibadore Total 1,047 GRAND TOTAL 12,388 Inventoried Roadless Area Wilderness Quality or Attributes and Potential Effects by Alternative  Table 18: Langdon IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 42 acres (0%) of mechanical and slash burning and 490 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 223 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 514 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 278 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 514 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 317 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 324 acres (3%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation – This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunities for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little effect for 3 to 5 years.  Table 19: Langdon IRA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.   Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.                 Table 20: Little Creek IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 327 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,569 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,422 acres (12%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,088 acres (10%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 2,142 acres (19%) of mechanical and slash burning and 737 acres (6%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,228 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,028 acres (9%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little affect for 3 to 5 years.  Table 21: Little Creek IRA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem. See specialist reports.  Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.                     Table 22: Marysvale Peak IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 217 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,024 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 925 acres (4%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,008 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,637 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 3,747 acres (17%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,517 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 3,356 acres (15%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.   Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.  Table 23: Marysvale Peak IRA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.                      Table 24: Signal Peak IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 862 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 8,095 acres (26%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 2,439 acres (8%) of mechanical and slash burning and 7,631 acres (25%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 5,009 acres (16%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,396 acres (21%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 3,478 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,633 acres (22%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.  Table 25: Signal Peak IRA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. Municipal watersheds occur within the project area. No change would take place. Municipal watersheds do occur within the project area. Buffers would be in place to protect public drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semiprimitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.                      Table 26: Tibadore IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Tibadore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 61 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,201 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 122 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,237 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 196 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,237 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 317 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,046 acres (11%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Tibadore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.   Table 27: Tibadore IRA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Tibidore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem. See specialist reports.  Tibidore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Tibidore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.                                               Map 3: Alternative 2 Treatments inside Inventoried Roadless Areas        Map 4: Alternative 3 Treatments inside Inventoried Roadless Areas        Map 5: Alternative 4 Treatments inside Inventoried Roadless Areas        Map 6: Alternative 5 Treatments inside Inventoried Roadless Areas        Action Alternatives 2-5 within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (UUAs): Would include mechanical (2 options) and prescribed fire activities to meet the purpose and need of aspen restoration. Mechanical treatments would occur in the four action alternatives as well as prescribed fire. Approximately 0.3 miles of temporary road would be constructed in Alternative 4 and 1.3 miles of temporary road would be constructed in Alternative 5 in the draft UUAs to access mechanical treatments. Temporary roads would be rehabilitated upon project completion. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Trees would be cut as close to the ground as possible. Access for mechanical treatments would be existing roads, cross country travel by tracked vehicles, and temporary roads in Alternatives 4 and 5.  Draft UUA Analysis Table 28 shows the total acres of each draft UUA. Next is shown the proposed acres within each alternative being treated by mechanical and prescribed fire, plus the percentage of the draft UUA being treated by mechanical and by prescribed fire as well as the total percent of the combined treated acres. Note that 60% or less actually being burned across the landscape. Therefore, the result of 60% being treated is the number shown in the Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) column.             Table 28: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project – Draft UUA Analysis   Alt. 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3  Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area (UUA) Total Draft UUA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Langdon 18,183 0 79 0% 987 5% 5% 268 1% 1,033 6% 7% Little Creek 9,529 0 127 1% 1,220 13% 14% 685 7% 894 9% 16% Marysvale Peak 27,168 0 220 1% 4,977 18% 19% 1,016 4% 4,958 18% 22% Signal Peak 29,900 0 583 2% 6,318 21% 23% 1,536 5% 6,273 21% 26% Tibadore 8,074 0 42 1% 1,119 14% 15% 56 1% 1,143 14% 15% All IRAs Combined 92,854 0 1,051 1% 14,620 16% 17% 3,561 4% 14,301 15% 19%  Table 28: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project – Draft UUA Analysis (Cont.)   Alt. 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5  Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area (UUA) Total Draft UUA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Langdon 18,183 0 363 2% 1,033 6% 8% 513 3% 725 4% 7% Little Creek 9,529 0 1,033 11% 685 7% 18% 669 7% 894 9% 16% Marysvale Peak 27,168 0 1,918 7% 4,623 17% 24% 1,621 6% 4,251 16% 22% Signal Peak 29,900 0 3,283 11% 5,504 18% 29% 2,426 8% 5,318 18% 26% Tibadore 8,074 0 56 1% 1,143 14% 15% 285 4% 972 12% 16% All IRAs Combined 92,854 0 6,654 7% 12,989 14% 21% 5,514 6% 12,161 13% 19%  Table 29: Draft UUA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 2 by Vegetation Type Alternative 2 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 2 Seral Aspen 77 Langdon Mountain Total 79 Little Creek Seral Aspen 70 Stable Aspen 57 Little Creek Total 127 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 144 Spruce-Fir 53 Stable Aspen 23 Marysvale Peak Total 220 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 246 Spruce-Fir 181 Stable Aspen 154 Signal Peak Total 583 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 5 Seral Aspen 37 Tibadore Total 42 GRAND TOTAL 1,051       Alternative 2 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 381 Seral Aspen 547 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 36 Langdon Mountain Total 987 Little Creek Seral Aspen 771 Spruce-Fir 2 Stable Aspen 447 Little Creek Total 1,220 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 433 Seral Aspen 2,747 Spruce-Fir 573 Stable Aspen 1,224 Marysvale Peak Total 4,977 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,273 Seral Aspen 2,571 Spruce-Fir 913 Stable Aspen 1,561 Signal Peak Total 6,318 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 220 Seral Aspen 826 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 49 Tibadore Total 1,118 GRAND TOTAL 14,620  Table 30: Draft UUA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 3 by Vegetation Type Alternative 3 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Seral Aspen 268 Langdon Mountain Total 268 Little Creek Seral Aspen 554 Spruce-Fir 2 Stable Aspen 128 Little Creek Total 685 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 749 Spruce-Fir 187 Stable Aspen 79 Marysvale Peak Total 1,016 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 760 Spruce-Fir 576 Stable Aspen 199 Signal Peak Total 1,536 Tibadore Seral Aspen 51 Stable Aspen 6 Tibadore Total 56 GRAND TOTAL 3,561        Alternative 3 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 382 Seral Aspen 592 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 36 Langdon Mountain Total 1,033 Little Creek Seral Aspen 489 Spruce-Fir 1 Stable Aspen 404 Little Creek Total 894 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 433 Seral Aspen 2,748 Spruce-Fir 549 Stable Aspen 1,228 Marysvale Peak Total 4,958 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,273 Seral Aspen 2,523 Spruce-Fir 846 Stable Aspen 1,631 Signal Peak Total 6,273 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 222 Seral Aspen 849 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 49 Tibadore Total 1,143 GRAND TOTAL 14,301 Table 31: Draft UUA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 4 by Vegetation Type Alternative 4 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Seral Aspen 363 Langdon Mountain Total 363 Little Creek Seral Aspen 781 Spruce-Fir 2 Stable Aspen 250 Little Creek Total 1,033 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 1,278 Spruce-Fir 507 Stable Aspen 134 Marysvale Peak Total 1,918 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 11 Seral Aspen 1,644 Spruce-Fir 984 Stable Aspen 643 Signal Peak Total 3,283 Tibadore Seral Aspen 51 Stable Aspen 6 Tibadore Total 56 GRAND TOTAL 6,654       Alternative 4 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 382 Seral Aspen 592 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 36 Langdon Mountain Total 1,033 Little Creek Seral Aspen 353 Spruce-Fir 1 Stable Aspen 331 Little Creek Total 685 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 432 Seral Aspen 2,589 Spruce-Fir 400 Stable Aspen 1,202 Marysvale Peak Total 4,623 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,267 Seral Aspen 2,178 Spruce-Fir 663 Stable Aspen 1,396 Signal Peak Total 5,504 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 223 Seral Aspen 849 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 49 Tibadore Total 1,144 GRAND TOTAL 12,989 Table 32: Draft UUA Acreage of Mechanical and slash burning, and Prescribed Fire in Alternative 5 by Vegetation Type Alternative 5 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Seral Aspen 474 Stable Aspen 39 Langdon Mountain Total 513 Little Creek Seral Aspen 539 Spruce-Fir 2 Stable Aspen 128 Little Creek Total 669 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 933 Spruce-Fir 407 Stable Aspen 281 Marysvale Peak Total 1,621 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 1,252 Spruce-Fir 596 Stable Aspen 577 Signal Peak Total 2,426 Tibadore Seral Aspen 279 Stable Aspen 7 Tibadore Total 285 GRAND TOTAL 5,514                                     Alternative 5 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 382 Seral Aspen 308 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 13 Langdon Mountain Total 725 Little Creek Seral Aspen 489 Spruce-Fir 1 Stable Aspen 404 Little Creek Total 894 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 433 Seral Aspen 2,336 Spruce-Fir 406 Stable Aspen 1,076 Marysvale Peak Total 4,251 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,273 Seral Aspen 1,979 Spruce-Fir 702 Stable Aspen 1,364 Signal Peak Total 5,318 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 222 Seral Aspen 682 Spruce-Fir 23 Stable Aspen 45 Tibadore Total 972 GRAND TOTAL 12,161                Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area Wilderness Characteristics and Potential Effects by Alternative  Table 33: Langdon Draft UUA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 79 acres (0%) of mechanical and slash burning and 987 acres (5%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 168 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,033 acres (6%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 363 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,033 acres (6%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 513 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 725 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation – This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunities for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little effect for 3 to 5 years.  Table 34: Langdon Draft UUA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics.                     Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. Table 35: Little Creek Draft UUA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 127 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,220 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 685 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 894 acres (9%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,033 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 685 acres (7%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 669 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 894 acres (9%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little affect for 3 to 5 years.  Table 36: Little Creek Draft UUA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.                      Table 37: Marysvale Peak Draft UUA-Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 220 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,977 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,016 acres (4%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,958 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,918 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,623 acres (17%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,621 acres (6%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,251 acres (16%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.  Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Table 38: Marysvale Peak Draft UUA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.                      Table 39: Signal Peak Draft UUA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 583 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,318 acres (21%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,536 acres (5%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,273 acres (21%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 3,283 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 5,504 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 2,426 acres (8%) of mechanical and slash burning and 5,318 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.  Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Table 40: Signal Peak Draft UUA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. Municipal watersheds occur within the project area. No change would take place. Municipal watersheds do occur within the project area. Buffers would be in place to protect public drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semiprimitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.                      Table 41: Tibadore Draft UUA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Tibadore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 42 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,119 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 56 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,143 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 56 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,143 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. 285 acres (4%) of mechanical and slash burning and 972 acres (12%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas. Fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically three to five years for vegetation to regenerate. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short term effect on these wilderness attributes. Tibadore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.  Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There wound not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.   Table 42: Tibadore Draft UUA - Effects to Roadless Characteristics for all Alternatives Tibidore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act.  Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany speciaist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale.  Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports.  Tibidore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in three to five years.  Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in three to five years.  Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes.  Tibidore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.                                                Map 7: Alternative 2 Treatments inside draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas        Map 8: Alternative 3 Treatments inside draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas      Map 9: Alternative 4 Treatments inside draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas        Map 10: Alternative 5 Treatments inside draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas       Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives Past, present and reasonable foreseeable actions on the Monroe Mountain were reviewed to determine the cumulative effects to Inventoried Roadless Areas and draft Undeveloped/Unroaded Areas. (Refer to Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 in this report.) Impacts to IRAs and draft UUAs from their geographic location, human activities, and from forest management activities that exist on the ground contribute to the current moderate to low ratings for wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics. Reasonably foreseeable actions would not permanently lower the wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics. Desired Condition The desired condition for Inventoried Roadless Areas and draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas is to “make practicable their preservation and use in an unimpaired condition” (Intermountain Region Planning Desk Guide; USFS 2004a). The action alternatives 2-5 would temporarily affect the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics. Over time they would stay the same or even improve as aspen ecosystems are improved. Conclusions The five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) located in the project area presently average low to moderate ratings for the six wilderness qualities or attributes. The southern portion of the Signal Peak IRA is the best area that seems to hold the potential for manageability as a wilderness area. Alternatives 2-5 would leave stumps mostly flush with the ground and a burned appearance. No roads would be constructed, no clear cuts, control lines feathered and reclaimed, sensitive areas would be avoided and timing restrictions imposed as proposed. The proposed actions would only temporarily reduce the qualities or attributes and characteristics until the vegetation grows and improves over a period of about three to five years. Stumps and burned vegetation may be noticeable for a longer time period. Alternatives 2-5 (including mechanical options 1 & 2) would take place without permanently lowering the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change. Effects to the draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) would be the same as for the IRAs with the exception of temporary roads in Alternatives 4 and 5 being constructed. These roads would be reclaimed after use and would only temporarily reduce the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change. After this analysis was completed, an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory (NA and PFA) was found in the Indian Peak area which is within the Signal Peak IRA. Approximately 310 acres of the NA and PFA overlap this aspen project. If these 310 acres were not treated, the reduction of treatments in the Signal Peak IRA would not change the existing wilderness eligibility. In addition, these 310 acres are not located in the Signal Peak draft UUA.     Table 43: Mechanical Treatment Acres in IRAs and Draft UUAs by Alternative.  Alternative 1 No Action Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Total IRA Only Acres 0 582 2,086 3,719 2,107 Total Draft UUA Only Acres 0 125 516 1,111 763 Total Overlap of Both IRA and Draft UUA Acres 0 926 3,045 5,543 4,751 Total Combined IRA and Draft UUA Acres 0 1,633 5,647 10,373 7,621  The implementation of best management practices such as no new road construction in IRA and little road construction in draft UUA, reclaiming control lines, reclaiming the temporary roads in draft UUA, and cutting stumps mostly flush with the ground would manage the IRAs and draft UUAs in a way that would not permanently lower and may over time enhance the wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics from their present condition. Compliance with the Forest Plan and Other Regulatory Direction The Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (UDSA 1986) does not provide desired conditions, goals, or standards and guidelines to specifically address or maintain roadless character. As described in chapter 1 of the EIS, the desired conditions and the purpose and need for this project are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in chapter IV of the LRMP, and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). The District has also compared the action alternatives with the general direction and the standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP to determine compliance, and found that the action alternatives are compliant with the LRMP. This review, along with supporting rationale is found in the project record. The District did a 2001 Roadless Area Conservation Rule (RACR) consistency review to determine compliance. The District determined this project complies with §294.13(b)(1)(i) and (ii), and (2) of the 2001 Roadless Rule. The review and supporting rationale is found in the project record. The Intermountain Region also concurred that this project complies with the 2001 RACR (USDA 2014).     Literature Cited National Forest Management Act of 1976 (NFMA)  USDA Forest Service, 1983, Appendix C, NFMA analysis of roadless areas used for Fishlake NF Land Resource Management Plan.  USDA Forest Service, 1986, Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan  USDA Forest Service, 2004, Intermountain Region Planning Desk Guide: A Protocol for Identifying and Evaluating Areas for Potential Wilderness  USDA Forest Service, 2007, Forest Service Handbook 1909.12 Chapter 70  USDA Forest Service, 2004, Fishlake National Forest, Draft Undeveloped Area Evaluation  USDA, Forest Service, 1979, Fishlake National Forest, RARE II Evaluation of Roadless Areas, 36 CFR 294 USDA, Forest Service, 2014, Intermountain Region, Concurrence for Roadless Project Review Appendix L – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resources Specialist Report (Partridge 2015)    Prepared by:  Art Partridge Rangeland Management Specialist  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 16, 2015            Executive Summary This Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project focuses on restoring aspen on Monroe Mountain with mechanical and prescribed fire treatments in the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce-fir cover types. Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain. Aspen historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres of Monroe Mountain. Aspen-dominated cover currently occurs on approximately 17,009 acres. This report considers the effects of five alternatives on the rangeland resources of Monroe Mountain. Vegetation treatments on the Forest are usually positive for rangeland resources as old decadent vegetation is removed and young tender vegetation is allowed to replace it. This change in the vegetation community usually starts off with a decrease in vegetation as the treatment occurs. Then as the treated area recovers there is an increase in vegetation. This increased vegetation provides better forage conditions for grazing animals. Monroe Mountain has approximately 175,705 acres of National Forest System (NFS) lands and the treatments proposed for restoring the aspen range from approximately 41,000 to 47,000 acres. This represents about 23 - 26% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain. When the proposed treatments are added to the past, present and reasonably foreseeable future projects listed in Appendix A the amount of NFS acres treated on Monroe Mountain would be between 51 - 54%. Alternative 1, the No Action Alternative would result in continued decline of the aspen ecosystems and movement away from desired conditions. If the No Action Alternative is chosen the desired conditions would not be achieved in the foreseeable future and aspen ecosystems may be irretrievably lost due to the delay in achieving desired conditions. With many demands for forage in the West, including elk, deer, and permitted livestock grazing the decision to take No Action and face losing such prolific producers of forage as aspen are capable of should not be acceptable. Based upon my findings, I conclude Alternatives 2 through 5 would move aspen ecosystem conditions closer to desired conditions. Though the difference in effects may be minor, Alternative 4 would be the best alternative for rangeland resources on Monroe Mountain because more acres would be treated. This alternative has the potential to produce the biggest increase in forage resources for grazing animals. It includes the most mechanical treatment which makes it possible to selectively decide which vegetation to remove.    Introduction This report looks at the effects of the proposed Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project on the rangelands on Monroe Mountain. This project is subject to the goals, objectives, standards, and guidelines found in the Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan. The rangelands on Monroe Mountain provide valuable forage and habitat for the permitted livestock and wildlife species which use Monroe Mountain. The Forest Service manages the forage, habitat, and permitted livestock grazing in the project area while the State of Utah Division of Wildlife Resources manages the wildlife populations. Through ecological succession the number of acres aspen historically dominated on Monroe Mountain has been reduced. This project is designed to restore the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain. Regulatory Framework The Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) sets forth in detail the direction for managing the land and resources of the forest. The desired conditions for the project are based on the objectives, goals, standards, and guidelines outlined in the LRMP. This analysis tiers to the Forest’s Final EIS and LRMP (USFS 1986), as encouraged by 40 CFR 1502.20. Best available science was used to develop desired conditions that are consistent with the LRMP.  The desired conditions described below, the purpose and need for this project, and the action alternatives are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in Chapter IV of the LRMP, and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). Review of the LRMP guidance was completed by the Interdisciplinary Team (ID team) of specialists working on this project.  The proposed treatment units are within management areas 2B – Rural and Roaded Natural Recreation; 4A – Fish Habitat Improvement; 4B – Habitat for Management Indicator Species; 5A – Big Game Winter Range - Non-forested; 6B – Intensive Livestock Management; 7B – Wood-Fiber Production - Genetics; and 9F – Improved Watershed. Relevant goals and objectives are listed below:  1. Ecosystems are restored and maintained, consistent with land uses and historic fire regimes, through wildland fire use and prescribed fire (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-40). 2. Manage forest cover types to provide variety in stand sizes shape, crown closure, edge contrast, age structure and interspersion (LRMP p. IV-99). 3. Prescribed fire is authorized forest-wide (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-41). 4. Use prescribed fire to reduce fuel buildup and meet resource objectives (LRMP p. IV-5). 5. Reduce hazardous fuels; the full range of reduction methods is authorized, consistent with forest and MA emphasis and direction (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-41). 6. Identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened, and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals (LRMP IV- 4). 7. Improve or maintain the quality of habitat on big game winter ranges (LRMP IV- 4). 8. Maintain structural diversity of vegetation on management areas dominated by forested ecosystems (LRMP IV-11). 9. Manage aspen for retention where needed for wildlife, watershed, or esthetic purposes (LRMP IV-11). 10. Manage seral aspen stands for a diversity of age classes (LRMP IV-11). 11. Manage aspen to perpetuate the species and improve quality (LRMP IV-4). 12. Provide wood fiber while maintaining or improving other resource values LRMP IV-4). 13. Improve timber age class distribution and maintain species diversity (LRMP IV-4). 14. Manage tree stands using both commercial and noncommercial methods. Enhance visual quality, diversity, and insect and disease control (LRMP IV-62 and IV-84d). 15. Maintain and manage forested inclusions to provide a high level of forage production, wildlife habitat, and diversity (LRMP IV-112). 16. The area would have a mosaic of fully stocked stands that follow natural patterns and avoid straight lines and geometric shapes (LRMP IV-113). 17. Prevent and control insect infestation and disease (LRMP IV-5)  Table 1 displays the management areas located within the project area, LRMP emphasis, and the relationship between the management area total acreage to the project.  Table 1: Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) Management Areas (MAs) within the project area LRMP MA Description Forest Plan Emphasis Forest-wide MA Acres Maximum MA Acres Proposed Maximum Percentage of MA Treated MA 2B Rural and Roaded Natural Emphasis is for rural and roaded-natural recreation opportunities. 27,855 4 0.0001% MA 4A Fish Habitat Improvement Emphasis is on fish habitat improvement where aquatic habitat is 2,474 171 0.07% MA 4B Habitat for Management Indicator Management emphasis is on the habitat needs of one or more 354,732 26,546 0.07% LRMP MA Description Forest Plan Emphasis Forest-wide MA Acres Maximum MA Acres Proposed Maximum Percentage of MA Treated MA 5A Big Game Winter Range – Non- Forested Treatments are applied to increase forage production of grass, forb, and browse species or to alter plant species composition for 66,720 475 0.007% MA 6B Intensive Livestock Management Range resource management level D (intensive 658,704 4,849 0.007% MA 7B Wood Fiber Products – Thru Genetics Manage wood-fiber production and utilization of large roundwood of a size and quality suitable 6,061 2,610 43% MA 9F Improved Watershed Improving watershed condition to eliminate the watershed improvement backlog, and maintaining projects already 135,842 1,646 0.01%  Resource Issues and Purpose and Need The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described below. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to: • Improving the quality of habitat and forage for wildlife species dependent upon aspen ecosystems (i.e. black-tailed deer (Odocoileus hemionus), Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus), and Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis)). • Improving the quality of habitat and forage for domestic ungulates (i.e. livestock) • Improving native species diversity. • Reducing hazardous fuel accumulations. • Reducing the risk for large scale, intense wildland fires. This results in lower risk to the safety of the public and firefighters. This also results in lower risk to sensitive wildlife species (i.e. Northern goshawk, Flammulated owl (Psiloscops flammeolus), Western boreal toad (Bufo boreas), and Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)). • Increasing the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role on the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain.  There were two issues effecting rangeland resources identified during project scoping. Issue 5 – Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen sprouts post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands; Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (2 or more growing seasons). Methodology for Analysis This analysis will examine the current vegetation condition and the desired vegetation condition on Monroe Mountain. It will identify the gap between the two conditions and will analyze the proposed alternatives and the design features of the alternatives to determine the effects that each alternative would have on the rangeland resources on Monroe Mountain. The analysis will discuss the acres to be treated by alternative and includes a simple analysis on the value of forage for livestock grazing. The environmental indicators to be measured are: 1. The number of acres to be treated or disturbed by alternative. 2. The percentage of the historical aspen ecosystem acres on Monroe Mountain to be treated. 3. The percentage of National Forest System (NFS) Land on Monroe Mountain to be treated. 4. An estimated cost per Animal Unit Month (AUM).  There are slight differences in the number of acres to be treated in the alternatives. The percentage of the historical aspen ecosystem acres to be treated by each alternative gives a reference of how much of the historical aspen will be treated. The percentage of NFS lands on Monroe Mountain to be treated provides a big picture view of just how much of Monroe Mountain will be treated by the project for cumulative effects purposes. The estimated cost per AUM measure provides an insight of the impact to the permittees from resting treated areas. Timeframes and Spatial Boundaries The expected timeframe to fully implement this project is 10 years minimum. This project will occur entirely on Monroe Mountain. The priority is to treat the southern part of Monroe Mountain first then move to the northern part of the mountain and conclude with the middle part of the mountain (See Sequencing Map in EIS). Mechanical treatments would be done before prescribed burn treatments are done. Mechanical treatments are proposed in areas adjacent to private lands, and within/adjacent to Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout habitat. These aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas would be treated first within each sequence area (areas 1, 2, and 3). Implementing these mechanical treatments first would help reduce the risk of impacts from prescribed fire to private property, Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout. Treatments would target upland non-riparian areas first. No more than 15% of the upland areas within a Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC) 6 would be treated in any one year. After the upland areas have been treated (15%) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function and aspen restocking (1,000 aspen saplings per acre) is achieved, additional upland areas (15%) in the same HUC 6 could occur. When the upland areas that have been treated in a given HUC 6, recover [comparable] watershed function and aspen restocking (1,000 aspen saplings per acre), the aspen/conifer in riparian areas could be treated. No more than 5-10% of the riparian areas within a HUC 6 would be treated in any one year. After the riparian areas have been treated (5-10%) and have recovered additional riparian areas (5-10%) in the same HUC 6 could occur. Similar design features are also included for four HUC 7s. Overview of the Proposed Action The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. The variation within the alternatives are acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments.  The maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (Alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch DBH, using group and single tree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (Alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years.  There are two mechanical treatment options being considered in this analysis for seral and stable aspen dominated stands. 1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained. In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer. There are also two mechanical treatments options being considered in this analysis for spruce/fir and mixed dominated conifer stands:  1. This option would occur throughout the project area. a) If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest). b) If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest). c) In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees are greater than a Basal Area (BA) of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven- aged management1 to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d) If no beetle killed or infested trees are present initially, trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. 1 Uneven-aged management – a planning sequence of treatments designed to maintain and regenerate a stand with three or more age classes (Helms 1998). This is opposed to even-aged management that describes a stand as trees composed of a single age class.  2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH. In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands. Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see Alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the alternative. The Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG) submitted to the Fishlake National Forest a document titled, “Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain (MMWG 2014).” The MMWG recommended this document for inclusion and analysis in the EIS. The Forest has reviewed this document and is proposing to adopt the browse thresholds and response options recommended by the MMWG. The document in its entirety is incorporated by reference. The UDWR, Southern Region Resource Advisory Committee (RAC) and the Utah Wildlife Board have reviewed and support this document. The following is a summary of the document with a description of the goals, thresholds, monitoring techniques, and response options.  The goals of the, “Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain,” document are three-fold: (1) establish thresholds of maximum percent aspen browse that would be acceptable following mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments in the seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas; (2) establish thresholds for the stable aspen areas where passive treatments are proposed; and (3) establish timely response options that would take place if the thresholds are not met. The thresholds and response options are expected to result in adequate recruitment to perpetuate both seral and stable aspen stands in order to move toward the desired conditions described below.  Following mechanical and prescribed fire treatments, healthy aspen roots systems typically are able to sustain vigorous shoot growth for a limited time (2 to 3 years), providing a brief opportunity to modify management if browsing exceeds threshold levels. Areas treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire would be rested from livestock use for 2 to 3 growing seasons to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts. During this timeframe, if aspen browse thresholds are exceeded, the District would implement one or more of the following responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, and to ensure aspen browse thresholds are not continually being exceeded: 1. If not already being implemented, the District may recommend to the UDWR, RAC and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR, RAC, and the Utah Wildlife Board. 2. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to hire or contract an adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in treatment areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. 3. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to fence treatment areas for 4 to 6 years until the new aspen shoots reach 6 feet height. 4. The District may restrict livestock use longer than 2 to 3 growing seasons until aspen recovery objectives are met.  After livestock are allowed to return to treatment areas, if browse thresholds are exceeded in a treatment area(s) that is grazed by both wild ungulates and livestock, the District would implement one or more of the responses listed above or the responses listed below in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, and to ensure aspen browse thresholds are not continually being exceeded:  1. The District may recommend to the UDWR, RAC, and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board. 2. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to hire/contract an adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in treatment areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. 3. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to fence treatment areas for 4 to 6 years until the aspen new shoots reach 6 feet height. 4. The District may seek opportunities to improve time, timing, and intensity of livestock grazing. This may include resting treatment areas again from livestock use, temporary reductions in livestock numbers, reducing the length of time that livestock are in certain pastures, and/or adjusting the timeframe of when livestock are in certain pastures. 5. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to utilize their Grass Bank Program on state Wildlife Management Areas to help offset temporary loss of livestock opportunities.  As described in the EIS, 58 transects have already been established in various stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data have been collected on overstory condition, aspen regeneration and recruitment (including browse use), fecal pellets and cow pies. These data provide a baseline dataset from which to detect change in subsequent years. The District proposes to continue monitoring aspen shoot density, height, and percent browse on an annual basis at these sites. Overstory and understory data would continue to be collected at longer intervals (3 to 5 years). Additional transects could be added as needed.  The aspen stands associated with each of the 58 transects are classified as stable aspen stand type 1 (SA1), type 2 (SA2), or type 3 (SA3). Stable Aspen 1, SA2, and SA3 stands differ in the relationship of recruitment density to overstory. For example, within SA2 and SA3, the stands are defined as currently being full self-replacing (F), transitional selfreplacing (T), marginal self-replacing (M), or non-self-replacing (N). To have adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen stands, the desire is for these stable aspen stands to move towards SA1, SA2-F, or SA3-F.  The stable aspen classes and recruitment levels are thus based directly upon the densities of stems that reach heights relatively safe from browsing of top leaders, and do not initially take into account the browse intensity values that clearly influence those aspen stem densities. Patterns in annual browse data would be analyzed over time in the stable aspen areas with the objective of determining how they might be incorporated to improve assessments of stable aspen condition and determine the trajectory of the stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain.  The District anticipates that mechanical and prescribed fire treatments in seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas will have an indirect beneficial effect related to aspen browse in the stable aspen areas within three years following treatments. As mechanical and prescribed fire treatments occur in adjacent areas, the stable aspen stands would continue to be monitored. For the stable aspen stands not already in SA1, SA2-F, or in SA3-F, a minimum benchmark of success in restoring stable aspen on Monroe Mountain would be an average improvement for all eligible stands (SA2 and SA3 levels T, M, and N) that is equal to one full level increase as a benefit of doing mechanical and prescribed fire treatments in adjacent areas. Thus, for every stand that fails to move up a level, another would have to move up two levels. Stand degradation (drop in levels) would also be factored in.  The District proposes the stable aspen responses be proportional (percentage) to the area treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire. Accurately predicting how browse relief would be distributed spatially following treatments would be difficult. Therefore, the District proposes that stable aspen improvement be interpreted at the broadest spatial scale (all 58 stands). For example, one year might allow that 10 percent of the project area be treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire. Of the 58 stable aspen stands, 47 stands are classified as being eligible for improvement; therefore, a threshold for reclassification to at least one level higher would be needed in 4 to 5 stands (10 percent) of the 47 eligible stands, with no stands being downgraded in response to the mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments or any other factors. The District anticipates the stable aspen stand level changes may be detectable within 3 years of treatment.  If monitoring does not detect sufficient improvement of stable aspen stands after an appropriate lag time (within approximately 3 years following treatments in adjacent areas; allowing some flexibility for unknowns such as extreme weather events), the District would implement one or more of the following responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, and to ensure stable aspen stand conditions improve:  1. The District may recommend to the UDWR, RAC, and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing the stable aspen stand thresholds. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board. 2. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to hire or contract an adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in stable aspen stand areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing stable aspen stand thresholds. 3. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to fence stable aspen areas until 1,000 new aspen shoots reach 6 feet height. 4. The District may seek opportunities to improve time, timing, and intensity of livestock grazing. This may include resting stable aspen areas from livestock use, temporary reductions in livestock numbers, reducing the length of time that livestock are in certain pastures, and/or adjusting the timeframe of when livestock are in certain pastures. 5. The District may coordinate with the UDWR to utilize their Grass Bank Program on state Wildlife Management Areas to help offset temporary loss of livestock opportunities.  Although management changes that reduce wild or domestic ungulate numbers may be necessary to restore healthy aspen communities on Monroe Mountain, such changes are viewed by the District as temporary and should not be interpreted as permanent or longterm reductions in stocking levels or population objectives.  To complement the monitoring plan and associated responses that could occur if thresholds are exceeded, and to gain a better understanding of wildlife use on aspen in the absence of livestock, the District proposes two options to rest areas from livestock grazing. The first option is to rest the Dairies pasture in the Koosharem Allotment for the duration of this project. The second option is to set aside six smaller exclosures in Rock Springs, Koosharem, Manning Creek, Hunts Lake, and Scrub Flat Allotments (See Table 2). The second option would require approximately 2.5 miles of livestock fence be constructed.  In addition, temporary fencing (approximately 7.2 miles) would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake to enclose 633 acres. This fence would be approximately 8 feet tall and constructed with net wire, t-post, and wooden post. Maintenance of the temporary fence would occur for 4 to 6 years until the aspen sprouts are greater than 6 feet tall, after which the fence would be removed.  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management). Design Features The design features for this project are outlined in Chapter 2 of the EIS. The design features that apply to the Range Management Program are listed below: o Treated areas would be rested from livestock grazing for at least 2 growing seasons post implementation, and possibly 3 to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts. o Invasive and noxious weeds are not known to occur in the aspen/conifer areas; however, treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds are detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. o Equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. o Treatments would target upland non-riparian areas first. No more than 15% of the upland areas within a HUC 6 would be treated in any one year. After the upland areas have been treated (15%) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function, additional upland areas (15%) in the same HUC 6 could occur. o After the upland areas have been treated and have recovered [comparable] watershed function and aspen restocking (1,000 aspen saplings per acre) are being achieved, then the aspen/conifer in riparian areas could be treated. o No more than 5-10% of the riparian areas within a HUC 6 would be treated in any one year. After the riparian areas have been treated (5-10%) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function, additional riparian areas (5-10%) in the same HUC 6 could occur. o Ground based mechanical treatments would only occur on slopes less than 40 percent. o Within riparian areas, equipment operations would occur when soils are dry, frozen or snow levels are sufficient to prevent wheels or tracks from coming in contact with soil. o A combination of skid trails, temporary roads, and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments that occur outside IRAs. Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. o No skid trails or landings would be constructed inside riparian areas. o Non-merchantable trees and slash would be consolidated and either piled and burned, or hauled off-site. Non-merchantable trees could also be made available for firewood cutting. Inside IRAs, if existing roads and skid trails do not allow for the removal of biomass, trees and slash may be consolidated, piled, and burned on-site. o No mechanical treatments using feller bunchers or skid-steers would occur in the stable aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. These areas may still be mechanically treated with hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. o Jack-strawing on a small scale, in site-specific areas to help impede ungulate access may occur. Monitoring Approximately 120 to 140 long-term aspen transects would be used to monitor status and trend of aspen following implementation of the selected alternative. Sixty to seventy transects would be in the seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas, and 60-70 in the stable aspen areas. Monitoring would address aspen regeneration/recruitment and understory conditions. Monitoring for this project is also outlined in Chapter 2 of the EIS. See the bullets below for monitoring details: • Approximately 120-140 long-term plots would be used to monitor status and trend of aspen following implementation of the selected alternative. • Monitoring would address aspen regeneration/recruitment and understory conditions. • Monitoring would be in conjunction and coordinated with aspen monitoring/research currently being done on Monroe Mountain by Brigham Young University. • During the first 2-3 growing seasons while treatment areas are being rested from livestock grazing, if monitoring indicates unsustainable browsing of aspen by wild ungulates (as defined by the thresholds document), considering the response options outlined in the thresholds document, the District would work cooperatively with Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, the Resource Advisory Committee (RAC), Utah Wildlife Board, permittees, and other interested stakeholders to reduce this pressure on aspen. The goal is to keep browse levels below the browse thresholds as outlined in the thresholds document. • After livestock are allowed to return to treatment areas, if monitoring indicates unsustainable browsing (as defined by the thresholds document) of aspen by livestock and/or wildlife, considering the response options outlined in the thresholds document, the District would take the necessary management actions to reduce this livestock related browsing pressure on aspen and/or work cooperatively with Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, RAC, Utah Wildlife Board and other interested stakeholders to reduce this pressure on aspen. The goal is to keep browse levels below the browse thresholds as outlined in the thresholds document. • Efforts would be based on achieving aspen ecosystem restoration and achieving the desired conditions described below.  Fifty eight transects have already been established in various stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data have been collected on overstory condition, aspen regeneration and recruitment (including browse use), fecal pellets. These data provide a baseline dataset from which to detect change in subsequent years. The District proposes to continue monitoring aspen shoot density, height, and percent browse on an annual basis at these sites. Overstory and understory data would continue to be collected at longer intervals (3 to 5 years). Additional transects could be added as needed.  To complement the above monitoring plan and associated responses that could occur if thresholds are exceeded, and to gain a better understanding of wildlife use on aspen in the absence of livestock, the District is considering two additional monitoring options:  1) Rest from livestock grazing the Dairies pasture; 4,212 acres in the Koosharem Allotment for the duration of this project. Stable and seral aspen stands occur in the Dairies pasture and it is an area regularly used by both livestock and wild ungulates. Part of the 2012 Box Creek Fire also occurred in the Dairies pasture. After the Box Creek Fire, approximately 400 acres of aspen were fenced inside the Dairies pasture. This 8-foot high fence was built to exclude all animals from entering the 400 acres. By resting the Dairies from livestock and considering the 400 acres that is fenced to exclude all animals, much can be learned about wildlife use on aspen in the absence of livestock. This would also provide an opportunity to monitor stable aspen in the absence of livestock. 2) Establish and monitor for the duration of the project six livestock exclosures located at various locations across Monroe Mountain. Locations and specific details for these six exclosures are included in Figure 5 and Table 2. These six exclosures, given their locations in diverse stable aspen communities with varying wild ungulate usage, would be expected to give representative data. Three of the exclosures would be located in areas that have no livestock use or are in sheep allotments and would not need new fencing. The other three exclosures would be located in cattle allotments and would take advantage of existing fences but would need to have some additional fence installed to keep livestock from utilizing the area. The total amount of new livestock fence needed would be approximately 2.5 miles. Table 2: Six Proposed Monitoring Livestock Exclosures (575 acres)  Elk Use  Exclosure Name Allotment Pasture Cattle or Sheep Acres Season Intensity Fence Needed Scrub Flat Scrub Flat NA Sheep 100 Winter Medium No Nielson Canyon Hunts Lake NA Sheep 96 Summer Medium No Jim’s Corral Koosharem Squaw Springs Cattle 38 Summer High Yes White Ledges Manning Creek Windy Ridge Cattle 23 Summer High Yes Burnt Flat Koosharem Burnt Flat Cattle 88 Transitional High Yes Browns Canyon Rock Springs Spring Cattle 230 Winter Medium No Figure 5: Location of the Dairies Pasture and the Six Livestock Exclosures  Affected Environment (Current Condition) The Fishlake National Forest (FNF) manages 1.7 million acres of National Forest System (NFS) land of which more than 1,036,000 acres are rangelands. There are 74 designated grazing allotments managed by the FNF. Livestock are trailed to and from forest grazing allotments in early summer and fall. There are numerous structural (water trough, pipelines, fences, corrals, etc.) and nonstructural (seedings, chainings, prescribed burns, etc.) range improvements on the forest associated with these allotments. Many of these range improvements provide water and forage for wildlife as well as livestock.  This aspen ecosystems restoration project focuses on restoring aspen on Monroe Mountain with mechanical and prescribed burn treatments in the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce-fir cover types. Monroe Mountain is located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale. It encompasses approximately 175,705 acres of NFS lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest - Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. It is divided into 11 livestock grazing allotments. The proposed action is to implement treatments designed to restore aspen on 10 of the allotments. The 10 affected allotments are divided into 33 pastures/units.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mtn. Aspen is an early successional tree species (sun loving and shade intolerant). Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers. Aspen sprouts heavily following disturbance and is relatively short-lived (i.e., 100-200 years). As it matures natural selection, self-thinning, and competition from other tree species work to reduce and replace aspen with late successional vegetation. Without some kind of a disturbance (i.e. fire or logging) aspen will eventually be replaced by late successional species. Grazing of aspen by animals tends to speed up the succession process because some of the aspen seedlings don’t survive after being grazed. Stable aspen is not replaced by late successional species, but in the lack of disturbance to stimulate it to sprout, the aspen may die.  Range conditions on Monroe Mountain are different today than they were before Euro- American settlement. Changes in human uses (grazing, timber harvests, recreation, water use, etc.), disturbance regimes (fire, insects, etc.), climatic conditions, and wildlife species density have led to a decline in aspen and an increase in conifer species. Of the 175,705 NFS acres on Monroe Mountain, aspen historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres. Aspen-dominated cover currently occurs on approximately 17,009 acres. Much of this aspen dominated cover has a component of mixed conifer in the understory (primarily subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa)). Approximately 31,129 acres are dominated by seral aspen; much of this seral aspen co-exists with mixed conifer (primarily subalpine fir). Approximately 5,210 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by mixed conifer (Engelmann spruce, Douglas fir, ponderosa pine, and white fir (A. concolor)). Much of this mixed conifer co-exists with aspen. Approximately 13,667 acres are dominated by spruce/fir with an aspen component. Approximately 43,877 acres in the project area are dominated by sagebrush cover types (primarily big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata)), some (approximately 12,231 acres) of which may have been aspen communities in the recent past. Dominance by sagebrush is not a successional pathway for aspen; however, in the absence of recruitment, aspen can be replaced with shrub cover types. These sagebrush-dominated communities still have some scattered aspen trees/stands. These changes have resulted in a smaller forage base for livestock and wildlife. Charles Kay (2003) reported that, “On average, aspen communities produce around 2,000 lbs. of air-dried forage per acre, while conifers typically produce 150 lbs. or less (Muggler 1988). Historically, there were over 300,000 acres of aspen on the Fishlake National Forest, but today, aspen occupies only about 150,000 acres (Bartos and Campbell 1998). As aspen communities have been converted to conifers, approximately 150,000 AUMs (Animal Unit Months) have been lost on the Fishlake.”  In 2008 Stam et al. (2008) reported that conifer cover affected aspen understory biomass in a major way in studies done on the Cedar City Ranger District of the Dixie National Forest (NF), the Richfield Ranger District of the Fishlake NF, and private land on Cedar Mountain east of Cedar City, UT. Their 2003 data showed a range of 1482 kg ha-1 at 0% conifer cover to a low of 10 kg ha-1 at 60% conifer cover. They quoted Mueggler, “Production can reportedly be reduced by 50% when conifers make up as little as 15% of the total tree basal area on the site (Mueggler 1985, 1988).”  In a 2004 study titled “Quantifying Losses of Understory Forage in Aspen Stands on the Dixie and Fishlake National Forests,” by Stam et al. (2004) they reported approximately $10,000,000 - $13,000,000 in additional revenue could be realized if historic aspen sites on the Dixie and Fishlake National Forests had not experienced reduced forage production because of conifer encroachment. This revenue would only be realized by livestock producers if additional forage was allocated totally to livestock grazing. They also reported that the additional grazing capacity could generate as much as $309,297 in the current year alone in livestock grazing fees for the two forests, if it was all allocated to livestock.  Historically, cattle and sheep use on Monroe Mountain was much higher than current use (Figure 1). Cattle and sheep use began in the late 1800s, and peaked around 1910 with use of about 23,300 AUMs. There was a steep decline (about 3 fold) in livestock AUM use on Monroe Mountain reaching a low in the 60s and 70s of about 7,700 AUMs. Cattle use declined since 1910 by about 10,000 AUMs and sheep use about 6,700 AUMs. Livestock use has remained fairly flat since the 1950s. Although Figure 1 shows total AUMs in 2014 are similar to total AUMs in 1910, the 1910 AUMs displayed in Figure 1 are likely conservative because mule deer AUMs are not included. In 1910 the AUMs were cattle and sheep and an unknown number of deer while in 2014 the AUMs were cattle, sheep, deer, and elk. All these animals browse aspen.            Figure 1: Monroe Mountain AUM History    Historical deer use is particularly hard to estimate, but using harvest data as a surrogate, mule deer use increased from 1930 reaching a peak of about 21,000 AUMs in the 1960s. Mule deer use has declined since the 1960s to about 9,100 AUMs today. Certainly the number of deer in central Utah is nowhere near the peak numbers of the 1960s.  Elk use of Monroe Mountain appears much heavier than historically. Old-time residents of the region can recall seeing their first elk on Monroe Mountain in the 1960s. Using winter counts as a basis to estimate, elk AUMs have increased from 0 in the 1960s to a peak of about 9,100 AUMs in 2000 and about 6,300 in 2014.  Noxious weeds and invasive species (ex. cheatgrass) management are a big concern on rangelands managed by the FNF. Various weed and vegetation treatments have been implemented to control the spread of noxious weeds and invasive species. There have not been large infestations of noxious weeds identified on Monroe Mountain. No noxious weeds are known to occur where prescribed fire or mechanical treatments are proposed. Desired Condition Aspen communities are persistent with multi-aged stems and adequate recruitment. Aspen ecosystems contain a variety of age classes and structural components distributed across the landscape (See Tables 3 and 4). Aspen systems regain dominance, reclaimed mainly from Engelmann spruce/subalpine fir and mixed conifer types accompanied by marked increases in understory vegetation and groundcover. Conifers occupy less than 15% of the canopy (Campbell and Bartos, 2001). Mature and old aspen stands comprise about 40% of the structural class distribution. Young aspen comprise about 20% of the structural class distribution (See Table 4). Dominant aspen trees are generally less than 100 years old. Other age classes are evenly distributed between early, young, and mid age classes. Diverse aspen conditions support a large variety of animals. Associated herbaceous and woody vegetation are highly variable. Perennial grasses and forbs dominate the understory areas with a range of shrub cover resulting in minimal bare ground within aspen systems. Site productivity generally determines individual stand densities. Aspen regeneration success is achieved through an integrated sprout protection program (See Appendix D). Fire regimes are adequate to perpetuate aspen, particularly in areas seral to conifer.  Table 3: Current and desired aspen stand structure in areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer   Aspen Sprouts/Acre (<6 feet in height) Aspen Saplings/Acre (6-12 feet in height) Aspen Recruits/Acre (>12 feet in height)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Seral Stands 0 3,286 592 0 911 119 59 615 276 Spruce/Fir Stands 0 4,433 1,121 0 183 38 0 301 137 Mixed Conifer Stands 0 1,255 677 0 233 108 0 286 117 Desired Condition2 Aspen Structure After Implementation of Mechanical and/or Prescribed Fire Treatments 5,000 No Max 10,000 to 20,000 1,000 No Max 1,000 to 2,000 400 No Max 400 to 600 2 These numbers demonstrate that the desired condition of having aspen communities with multi-height stems with adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities are being met.                         Table 4: Current and desired vegetation structural stage (VSS) for aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir stands; DBH = diameter at breast height   VSS 1: Grass-Forb/Shrub  (DBH: 0-1 inch) VSS 2: Seedling-Sapling (DBH: 1-5 inches") VSS 3: Young Forest (DBH: 5-12 inches)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Stable Stands 19% 24% 22% 6% 36% 23% 40% 63% 50% Aspen: Seral Stands 0% 18% 13% 5% 47% 15% 37% 82% 58% Mixed Conifer Stands 8% 17% 13% 5% 37% 20% 24% 52% 42% Spruce/Fir Stands 4% 20% 13% 7% 26% 16% 23% 63% 41% Desired Condition All Stands **** **** 10% **** **** 10% **** **** 20%              VSS 4: Mid-Aged Forest (DBH: 12-18 inches) VSS 5: Mature Forest (DBH: 18-24 inches) VSS 6: Old Forest (DBH: 24 plus inches)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Stable Stands 0% 11% 5% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Aspen: Seral Stands 0% 32% 13% 0% 5% 1% 0% 5% 0% Mixed Conifer Stands 6% 43% 19% 2% 6% 4% 0% 5% 2% Spruce/Fir Stands 4% 31% 21% 0% 14% 6% 0% 13% 2% Desired Condition All Stands **** **** 20% **** **** 20% **** **** 20%  Stable aspen is a term used to describe aspen stands in which conifer trees play little or no role. The stable aspen stands were classified into three broad categories based upon the density of living canopy trees. In addition to the dominant canopy trees, aspen recruits (greater than 12 feet tall but clearly below the dominant canopy), aspen saplings (6 to 12 feet tall and at low risk to being top-browsed), and aspen sprouts (less than 6 feet tall and at relatively high risk to being top-browsed) are also generally present.  Data was collected from 58 stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. The stands were divided into the following categories listed in order of decreasing health full (F) for fully self-replacing; transitional (T), with recruitment levels that are borderline to those necessary for self-replacement; marginal (M), where recruitment is happening but at a level that might not be sufficient for self-replacement; and non-self-replacing (N) where recruitment is not happening, or is at a level that is clearly too low to maintain the stand through time. The stands were then further classified by the density of the canopy trees. The categories for canopy density are greater than 1,000 canopy trees per acre high density Stable Aspen Class 1 (SA1), low density Stable Aspen Class 2 (SA2) with canopy tree densities of less than 200 trees per acre, and intermediate-density Stable Aspen Class (SA3) is defined by a density of 200 to 1000 canopy trees per acre. Overall, in 2013, 11 of 58 (19 %) stable aspen stands were classified as fully self-replacing, five (9 %) as transitional, 13 (22 %) as marginal and 29 (50 %) as non-self-replacing (Table 5). To move towards the desired conditions of having persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities, the desire is for the stable aspen stands to be in SA1, SA2-F, or SA3-F; therefore, 79 % (47 stands) of the stable aspen stands need to improve. Table 5: Classification of 58 stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data for these stands was collected in 2013. Classification Number of Aspen Stands SA1 1 SA2 -F 5 SA2-T 3 SA2-M 7 SA2-N 15 SA3-F 5 SA3-T 2 SA3-M 6 SA3-N 14 Environmental Consequences This aspen ecosystem restoration project focuses on restoring aspen on Monroe Mountain with mechanical and prescribed burn treatments in the aspen, mixed conifer, and sprucefir cover types. The cumulative effects boundary for this analysis will be the area considered as Monroe Mountain (See Project Vicinity Map in EIS). There are five alternatives being considered for detailed analysis. The acres to be treated under the alternatives range from 0 under Alternative 1 (No Action) to 47, 274 acres under Alternative 4 (See Tables 6 & 7). Table 6 also show the miles of temporary roads that are proposed for each alternative. Table 6  Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Total Acres Miles of Temporary Roads / Acres Disturbed Alternative 1 - No Action 0 0 0 0 Alternative 2 8,186 32,991 41,177 8.8 / 21 Alternative 3 13,647 31,357 45,004 8.8 / 21 Alternative 4 19,838 27,436 47,274 13.3 / 32   Table 7  The expected timeframe to fully implement this project is 10 years minimum. The scale and timing of the mechanical and prescribed fire treatments are likely to affect the level of impacts that both wild and domestic grazers have on aspen response to treatments. Under all of the alternatives most of the rangeland resources will continue to be managed as they are currently being managed with pasture rotations based on utilization standards. Appendix C shows how many acres would be treated in each grazing allotment by pasture under each alternative and the percent of the pasture that it represents. There will be a temporary loss of vegetation when areas are treated and temporary roads are built and used. After areas are treated they would be rested from livestock grazing for at least two growing seasons to allow the vegetation some recovery time. It is expected that diversity and amount of understory vegetation in conifer/aspen stands will improve as the treatments are completed. The rest from livestock grazing would be a work in progress depending on the specifics and timing of the individual treatments. The treatments may require anything in between entire allotments/pastures being rested to a very small portion of an allotment/pasture needing rest. Grazing rotations would be modified as needed, which may result in not following existing rest or deferment schedules for a limited time (i.e. one to three years). Herding and temporary electric fences can help minimize the effects to the permittees brought on by the required rest period after treatment. If these are ineffective then complete rest of the allotment/pasture would be considered. The planning and implementation of livestock grazing rest for treatment areas will require a solid working relationship between the Forest Service and livestock grazing permittees. This working relationship will play a key role in the success of this aspen restoration project. Wildlife would still be grazing treatment areas after they are treated. This continued wildlife grazing presents a risk to aspen recovery following treatments. To address this risk, the District is proposing quantifiable aspen browsing thresholds and response options to aid in accomplishing desired conditions. See the overview of the proposed action section of this report and Appendix D for details. Any time vegetation is treated or soil is disturbed on the forest there is a risk of noxious weed establishment. Currently there are no noxious weeds known to occur in the proposed treatment areas and there are weed related design features to help minimize the potential effects (see Design Features section). Alternative 1 - No Action The No Action Alternative is to continue with the current management. This alternative does not address the stated purpose and need of the project as described above. Under this alternative zero acres of the aspen ecosystems targeted in this project would be treated. The most likely time aspen disturbance would occur is during a wildfire event or until a National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) environmental analysis is completed to authorize the treatment of aspen. Direct Effects Consequences of this alternative are continued degradation of the aspen ecosystem and continued loss of understory habitat and forage. Aspen dominated acres are expected to decline without disturbance to remove competition and stimulate the aspen to regenerate. This decline in aspen would reduce the forage that is available for livestock. Indirect Effects Continued livestock and wildlife grazing would speed up the rate of aspen decline (succession) as aspen sprouts are grazed. This could lead to a need to reduce livestock grazing as the carrying capacity of the land changes. Cumulative Effects A list of the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable projects on Monroe Mountain has been assembled and is attached in Appendix A. Many of those projects are vegetation manipulation projects. Usually there is a short term loss of vegetation associated with vegetation projects followed by an increase in rangeland vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen). Rangeland resources benefit from the increased vegetation. The increase in vegetation provides more forage for grazing animals which reduces the intensity and frequency of grazing on the plants. It also provides beneficial ecological effects such as plant species diversity, plant age class diversity, and decreased bare ground etc. Other projects listed in Appendix A include projects to manage livestock grazing. Effects of grazing (livestock/wildlife) have played a part of Monroe Mountain’s history and the aspen ecosystem decline. Grazing of aspen sprouts tends to speed up vegetation succession from early seral aspen plant communities to late seral (conifer) communities. Grazing would continue to play a role in the future condition of Monroe Mountain as wildlife use the forest and livestock are permitted to graze on the forest. Aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain are still declining despite numerous small-scale past vegetation treatments (mechanical & fire). The forest hasn’t been able to do large enough vegetation treatments and control ungulate grazing on the treatment areas to improve the aspen ecosystems on the Monroe Mountain landscape. The cumulative effects of this No Action Alternative added to the lack of large scale vegetation manipulation projects in the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future increases the risk of losing the aspen ecosystem from Monroe Mountain entirely. Approximately 76% of the historic aspen ecosystem acres have already been lost or is experiencing a conversion of dominant cover type (See Figures 2 & 3). Appendix A indicates that presently and in the foreseeable future approximately 28% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain have been or will still be treated if the No Action Alternative is chosen. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Losing the aspen ecosystems entirely because of No Action (no treatment, reduced recruitment, continued grazing, and succession) would be an irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources. Alternatives 2 – 5 (Actions Applicable all Action Alternatives) Under all the alternatives there are two monitoring options being considered to complement the established and already on going monitoring of aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. These monitoring options are expected to give better understanding of wildlife use of treated areas in the absence of livestock grazing. The first option being considered is a proposal to rest the 4,212 acre Dairies pasture of the Koosharem Allotment for the duration of this project, 10 years. The permittees on the Koosharem Allotment would have to get through the implementation of this project with seven pastures instead of eight. Approximately 782 acres would be treated in the Dairies Pasture under alternatives 2 – 5. Additional acres in the Dairies pasture have been or are currently being treated under the Box Creek Fuels Reduction Project. Loss of this pasture could result in large impacts to the permittees on the Koosharem Allotment if the other pastures don’t have enough forage for their livestock. The second monitoring option is to have six exclosures which would rest 575 acres on five grazing allotments for the duration of this project, 10 years (See Table 2). This option would rest 3,637 fewer acres and would spread it across five allotments instead of one allotment. It allows the exclosures to be placed in different types of wildlife range (summer, transitional, winter) and on different kinds of livestock grazing allotments (cattle, sheep). This option also increases the number of permittees sharing the impacts of resting the monitored locations and reduces the impact to individual permittees. There is some fencing that will need to be done to implement this option. Approximately 2.5 miles of livestock fence would be built to implement this option. Ground disturbance associated with this fence installation would be approximately 2.4 acres (2.5 mi x 5,280’ x 8’/43,560’ = 2.4 acres). Temporary fencing (approximately 7.2 miles) would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake to enclose 633 acres. This fence would be approximately 8 feet tall and constructed with net wire, t-posts, and wooden posts. Maintenance of the temporary fence would occur for 4 to 6 years until the aspen sprouts are greater than 6 feet tall, after which the fence would be removed. Ground disturbance associated with this fence would be between approximately 2 acres and 7 acres depending on the width of the disturbance needed to put up the fence (7.2 mi x 5,280’ x 2’ /43,560= 1.7 acres, 7.2 mi x 5,280’ x 8’ / 43,560’= 7.0 acres). One of the treatment options considered for the mechanical treatments is to thin conifer up to 8 inch DBH from below within IRAs and draft UUAs. This option would leave conifer trees that are greater than 8 inch DBH in the stand so conifers would continue to make up part of the basal area of the stand. The increase in early seral plants (biomass/forage) after treatment would be reduced because the larger conifers are left and make up part of the basal area in the stand. The treatment may have a shorter life span because the larger conifer trees that are left continue to grow and shade the ground. If the trees that are left are affected by bugs the shading effect might not be as bad and the trees might eventually fall and breakdown opening the canopy so aspen and understory plants could increase. Stam et al. (2008) reported that conifer cover affected aspen understory biomass in a major way. They cited Mueggler, “Production can reportedly be reduced by 50% when conifers make up as little as 15% of the total tree basal area on the site (Mueggler 1985, 1988).” Alternative 2 This alternative is to treat 41,177 acres of Monroe Mountain with a combination of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments. This alternative would include 8,186 acres of mechanical and 32,991 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 8.8 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. Approximately 2.4 acres are disturbed for each mile of road constructed (15’ road width, 20’ disturbance width, (20’ X 5,280’)/43,560’ = 2.4 acres/mile). About 21 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction. This Alternative would allow the treatment of the least amount of acres of any of the alternatives excluding Alternative 1- No Action. Maps of the Alternatives are included in the EIS. Direct Effects The direct effects of Alternative 2 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen) and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see Design Features). When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds are detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. Indirect Effects The short term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of Animal Unit Months (AUMs). The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years which would be treating about 4,100 acres per year. Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost, permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally, finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is $1.35/AUM. If permittees have to feed hay the cost of an AUM could be about $90 (1 AUM equals 900 lbs. of forage and hay is $200/ton, then (900/2000) x $200 = $90/AUM). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized through the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue. Cumulative Effects A list of the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in Appendix A. Most of the projects identified in Appendix A are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been through the use of fire (prescribed fire & wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment which will be used to treat most of the acres included in all the alternatives. The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A shows that approximately 49,000 (28% of NFS acres on Monroe Mountain) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 – 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 2 would treat almost that many acres (41,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a ten year period 4,100 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates. Alternative 2 is a large scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 58% (41,177/71,000 = 58%) of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative. The thought behind this large scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals won’t overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem. This 41,177 acres represents 23% (41,177/175,705 = 23%) of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain. When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 2 would have on the environment is that approximately 51% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions. Alternative 3 Under this alternative 45,004 acres will be treated which is 3,827 (9%) more acres of aspen treatment than Alternative 2. Alternative 3 would include 13,647 acres of mechanical and 31,357 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 8.8 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. About 21 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction. Maps of the Alternatives are included in the EIS. Direct Effects The direct effects of proposed Alternative 3 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen) and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see Design Features). When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds are detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. Indirect Effects The short term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of Animal Unit Months (AUMs). The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years which would be treating about 4,500 acres per year. Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is $1.35/AUM. If permittees have to feed hay the cost of an AUM could be about $90 (1 AUM equals 900 lbs. of forage and hay is $200/ton, then (900/2000) x $200 = $90/AUM). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized through the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue. Cumulative Effects A list of the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in Appendix A. Most of the projects identified in Appendix A are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been through the use of fire (prescribed fire & wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment which will be used to treat most of the acres included in Alternative 3. The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A shows that approximately 49,000 (28% of NFS acres on Monroe Mtn.) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 – 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 3 would treat almost that many acres (45,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a ten year period 4,500 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates. Alternative 3 is a large scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 63% (45,004/71,000 = 63%) of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative. The thought behind this large scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals won’t overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem. This 45,004 acres represents 26% (45,004/175,705 = 26%) of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain. When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 3 would have on the environment is that approximately 54% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions. Alternative 4 Alternative 4 is to treat 47,274 acres of Monroe Mountain with a combination of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments. Of the five alternatives being analyzed this alternative proposes the most acres for treatment. It includes 6,097 (15%) more acres for treatment than Alternative 2. This alternative would include 19,838 acres of mechanical and 27,436 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 13.3 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. About 32 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction. Maps of the Alternatives are included in the EIS. Direct Effects The direct effects of proposed Alternative 4 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen) and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see Design Features). When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds are detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. Indirect Effects The short term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of Animal Unit Months (AUMs). The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years which would be treating about 4,700 acres per year. Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is $1.35/AUM. If permittees have to feed hay the cost of an AUM could be about $90 (1 AUM equals 900 lbs. of forage and hay is $200/ton, then (900/2000) x $200 = $90/AUM). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized through the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue. Cumulative Effects A list of the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in Appendix A. Most of the projects identified in Appendix A are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been through the use of fire (prescribed fire & wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment which will be used to treat most of the acres included in all the alternatives. The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A shows that approximately 49,000 (28% of NFS acres on Monroe Mtn.) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 – 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 4 would treat almost that many acres (47,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a ten year period 4,700 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates. Alternative 4 is a large scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 67% (47,274/71,000 = 67%) of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative. The thought behind this large scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals won’t overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem. This 47,247 acres represents 27% (47,247/175,705 = 27%) of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain. When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 4 would have on the environment is that approximately 55% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions. Alternative 5 Alternative 5 is to treat 41,525 acres of Monroe Mountain with a combination of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments. The acres treated by Alternative 5 are slightly higher (1%) than the acres treated under Alternative 2 the difference lies in the amount of mechanical treatment compared to the amount of prescribed fire treatment. This alternative would include 15,072 acres of mechanical and 26,453 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 12.8 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. About 31 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction. Maps of the Alternatives are included in the EIS. Direct Effects The direct effects of proposed Alternative 5 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen) and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see Design Features). When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds are detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. Indirect Effects The short term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of Animal Unit Months (AUMs). The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years which would be treating about 4,200 acres per year. Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is $1.35/AUM. If permittees have to feed hay the cost of an AUM could be about $90 (1 AUM equals 900 lbs. of forage and hay is $200/ton, then (900/2000) x $200 = $90/AUM). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized through the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue. Cumulative Effects A list of the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in Appendix A. Most of the projects identified in Appendix A are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mtn. have been through the use of fire (prescribed fire & wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment which will be used to treat most of the acres included in all the alternatives. The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A shows that approximately 49,000 (28% of NFS acres on Monroe Mtn.) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 – 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 5 would treat almost that many acres (42,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a ten year period 4,200 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates. Alternative 5 is a large scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 58% (41,525/71,000 = 58%) of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative. The thought behind this large scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals won’t overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem. This 41,525 acres represents 24% (41,525/175,705 = 24%) of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain. When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 5 would have on the environment is that approximately 52% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions. Mitigation Measures/Design Features Before treatments take place on grazing allotments notify the livestock grazing permittees at least one year in advance of the treatments which would take place on their allotments and hold discussions on how best to rest the treated areas. Ensure the resting of treatment areas, herding, and electric fences are incorporated into Annual Operating Instructions. These actions will help ensure that permittees are in the communication loop and will give them enough time to plan for the resources they need to continue their operations. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Since aspen reproduces by suckering, losing the aspen ecosystem entirely after treatment would be irreversible and irretrievable. Alternatives 2 through 5 are all large scale aspen ecosystem treatments designed to restore aspen ecosystems. Adequate regeneration and protection of the regeneration from the effects of overgrazing (livestock/wildlife) are keys to the success of this project. The “Thresholds” document in Appendix D outlines the regeneration goals and response options that could be taken to control the effects of overbrowsing on aspen regeneration. Conclusions With many demands for forage in the West, including elk, deer, and permitted livestock grazing the decision to take No Action and face losing such prolific producers of forage as aspen are capable of should not be acceptable. A decision to make no changes in management (including no treatments) is still a decision and it carries its own risks and consequences as succession continues to move the vegetation toward late seral vegetation communities. The risks and consequences include (1) continued degradation of the aspen ecosystem, (2) continued loss of forage, and (3) increased risks of large wildfires with associated concerns.  Alternatives 2 through 5 are all large scale aspen ecosystem treatments designed to restore aspen ecosystems. These alternatives would treat approximately 23-27% of the NFS acres on Monroe Mountain. Adequate regeneration and protection of the regeneration from the effects of overgrazing (livestock/wildlife) are keys to the success of this project, to restore aspen ecosystems. Browse thresholds and response options are proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates. Rangeland resources on Monroe Mountain should benefit from any of the treatments. The difference between the alternatives in the amount of disturbance associated with the miles of temporary roads is small and should not affect the results of the project.  There were two issues effecting rangeland resources identified during project scoping. All the action alternatives (Alternatives 2 through 5) include design features to address the issues. Issue 5 – Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen sprouts post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. The design features built into the action alternatives of this proposed project to address Issue 5 are included below. First, livestock would not be allowed to graze treated areas for at least two growing seasons after treatment. Second, the District is proposing quantifiable aspen browse thresholds and response options that would be implemented if thresholds are exceeded. These browse thresholds and response options are applicable to Alternatives 2-5. Based on implementation of the browse thresholds and response options, an adequate number of new aspen sprouts following treatments are expected to reach 6 feet height and stable aspen stands are expected to begin showing improvement; thus moving towards accomplishing the desired conditions outlined for this project.  Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (2 or more growing seasons). The acres which are proposed for treatment in Alternatives 2 through 5 of this project are spread across 10 different grazing allotments. Impacts to the permittees would be minimized through the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas and/or stable aspen stands can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. The permittees would also be notified at least one year in advance of treatments being done on their allotments so that they can plan accordingly. Based on this summary, the District anticipates that permittees will have a place to graze their livestock while treatment areas or stable aspen stands are being temporarily rested.  There are two monitoring options being considered to complement the established and already on going monitoring of aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. These monitoring options are expected to give better understanding of wildlife use of aspen in the absence of livestock grazing. Monitoring option 2 would be the best option for range management because this option would rest 3,637 fewer acres than monitoring option 1. Monitoring option 2 would also spread the rested acres for monitoring across five allotments instead of one allotment. Compared to resting the Dairies pasture (monitoring option 1), the exclosures would be less disruptive to the rotation grazing system in place on the mountain, and would also likely generate more representative data, given their locations in diverse aspen communities and they will be subject to varying wild ungulate usage.  The difference in the effects of Alternatives 2 through 5 on the rangeland resources of Monroe Mountain are minor and are a function of the acres which will be treated under each alternative. Alternative 4 would be the best alternative for range management on Monroe Mountain because more acres, 27% of NFS land on Monroe Mountain, would be treated. This alternative has the potential to produce the biggest increase in forage resources for grazing animals. After this analysis was completed an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory was found near Indian Peak. Approximately 310 acres of the territory overlap this aspen project. These 310 acres occur mostly in stable aspen and make up less than 1% of the project area. If these 310 acres are not treated there would be little impact to rangeland resources on Monroe Mountain.         Literature cited Kay, Charles E. August 2003. “Long Term Vegetation Change on Utah’s Fishlake National Forest: A Study in Repeat Photography.” USDA Forest Service Intermountain Region (R4) / Utah State University, Logan, UT. Page 18. Stam, B. R. et al. January 2008. “Effect of Conifer Encrochment Into Aspen Stands on Understory Biomass.” Rangeland Ecology & Management. 61(1). Pages 93 – 97. Stam, B. R. and others. 2004. “Quantifying Losses of Understory Forage in Aspen Stands on the Dixie and Fishlake National Forests.” Utah State University, Logan, UT. Pages 19 -21 Producers Livestock. May 2014. “Hay Sales Results May 10, 2014.” Producers Livestock Greeley, CO. page 1 Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG). January 15, 2014. “Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain.” Pages 1 – 11. Monroe Mountain Working Group. Sept. 2012. “Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Final Livestock Improvement and Monitoring Proposal.” Pages 1-22. Author 1, and others. Date. Title of article or publication. Publisher, place where published. Document #. Pages referenced (or total pages of publication if pages already noted in cite). Author 2, and others. Date. Title of article or publication. Publisher, place where published. Document #. Pages referenced (or total pages of publication if pages already noted in cite).          Figures  Figure 2: Aspen Ecosystem on Monroe Mountain           Figure 3: Aspen Ecosystem on Monroe Mountain              Figure 4: Unsuccessful treatment on Monroe Mountain. There is no aspen regeneration left because it was grazed off.                         Appendix A Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project  The past, present and reasonable foreseeable future actions include: (Some of these actions were summarized from Table 7 below)  • Approximately 1,962 acres of brushsaw fuels reduction work on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 6,194 acres of Dixie Harrow work on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 5,774 acres of mechanical harvest on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 19,774 acres of prescribed fire on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 12,895 acres being burned by wildfire on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 2,077 acres of tree planting on Monroe Mountain. • Personal use Christmas tree sales on Monroe Mountain. • Personal use fuelwood gathering on Monroe Mountain. • Private land development including new homes on Monroe Mountain. • Fuels reduction work on private lands • Recreational use – primarily hiking, horseback riding, mountain biking, OHV use, crosscountry skiing, hunting, fishing, and snowmobile use on Monroe Mountain. • Swift Springs Water Development Project • Monroe Mountain Livestock Management Improvement Project • Livestock grazing. • Livestock management adjustments under the purview of Forest Service administrative authorities found in 36 CFR 222.4. • Ongoing maintenance of existing range infrastructure; fences, troughs, waterlines, etc. • Ongoing maintenance of roads and trails.                     Table 7: Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Vegetation Related Actions on Monroe Mountain Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions on Monroe Mountain Name Type of Action Year Acres Blue Peak Brushsaw 2003 766 Dukee Fuels Brushsaw 2004 617 Thompson Basin Brushsaw 2007 579 085 Road Dixie Harrow 2000 22 Bagley North Dixie Harrow 1997 47 Bell Rock Dixie Harrow 1996 138 Big Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 133 Blue Peak Dixie Harrow 2003 766 Box Creek Dixie Harrow 1995 29 Box Creek Dixie Harrow 2003 104 Box Creek Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2008 156 Brindley Flat Dixie Harrow 2006 40 Burnt Flat Dixie Harrow 1995 96 Burnt Flat Dixie Harrow 1998 316 Dry Creek Dixie Harrow 2004 93 Durkee Springs Dixie Harrow 2004 466 Forshea Mountain Dixie Harrow 1999 65 Hells Hole Dixie Harrow 2004 132 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 14 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2004 89 Indian Peak Dixie Harrow 2006 95 Koosharem Dixie Harrow 2003 76 Little Table Dixie Harrow 1997 126 Rueben Burn Dixie Harrow 2004 155 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 1995 440 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 2003 265 Six Patch/Rock Springs Dixie Harrow 1995 109 Squaw Springs Dixie Harrow 1995 440 Thurber Fork Dixie Harrow 1998 570 Thurber Fork Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2009 461 Willis Spring Dixie Harrow 2005 176 Twin Peaks Dixie Harrow 2012 578 Big Flat Aspen 4,5 &6 Harvest 1983 4 Dry Creek –State Harvest 1999 151 Annabella Aspen II Harvest 2005 104 Doe Flat Harvest 1992 28 Forshea Harvest 1998 111 Indian Ranch Harvest 1969 47 Langdon Mountain Harvest 1969 17 Research Unit Harvest 1998 12 South Monument Asp. Harvest 1987 17 State Section 16 Harvest 1998 147 White Ledge Harvest 1997 36 White Ledge B Harvest 1998 71 Annabella Harvest 2001 234 Annabella Aspen 3 Harvest 2005 22 Buck Hollow Harvest 1994 24 Clover Flat Harvest 1989 186 Cove Mtn. Salvage II Harvest 1996 29 Cove Mtn. Salvage 1 Harvest 1993 9 Cove Mountain Harvest 2014 1,774 Dry Lake Harvest 1993 46 Langdon Harvest 1991 151 Lone Pine Harvest 1984 78 Lower Langdon Harvest 1984 82 Mill #10 Harvest 2003 162 Mill #11 Harvest 2001 68 Mill #11a Harvest 2003 68 Mill #8 Salvage Harvest 1999 10 Mill #9 Salvage Harvest 2000 52 Mill Creek Harvest 2000 274 Monroe Peak Harvest 1980 14 Monument Peak Salv. Harvest 1998 60 Monument Peak Salv.II Harvest 1999 131 North Clover Harvest 2011 191 Pole Canyon Harvest 1982 19 White Pine Harvest 2000 49 White Pine 2 Harvest 2002 61 Wooten Spring Harvest 1989 103 Mill 12 Harvest 2004 62 Box Creek Phase 1 Harvest 2012 386 Box Creek Phase 2 Harvest 2013 284 Monument Peak Harvest 2014 400 Monument Peak Prescribed Fire 2015 3,120 Box Creek Prescribed Fire 2012 650 Box Creek Prescribed Fire 2015 2,658 Twin Peaks Prescribed Fire 2014 5,169 Kinney Spring Prescribed Fire 1996 794 Greenwich Creek Prescribed Fire 1996 83 Burnt Flat Prescribed Fire 1983 359 Box Creek Prescribed Fire 1997 509 Little Table Prescribed Fire 1997 485 Bean Hill Prescribed Fire 1986 123 Shaffers Prescribed Fire 1997 334 Jackie Canyon Prescribed Fire 1997 267 Rubens Prescribed Fire 2005 948 Deer Spring Prescribed Fire 1989 41 Buck Hollow Prescribed Fire 1989 18 Tuft Draw Prescribed Fire 1989 622 Deer Spring Prescribed Fire 1988 195 Pine Canyon Prescribed Fire 1996 434 Tibadore Pond Prescribed Fire 1988 669 Tibadore Pond Prescribed Fire 1989 387 Kingston Trough Prescribed Fire 1980 255 Forshea Prescribed Fire 1993 1,313 Thompson Basin Prescribed Fire 2009 180 Thompson Basin Prescribed Fire 2008 163 Annabella Wildfire 2006 573 Bald Knoll Wildfire 2003 68 Flat Wildfire 1997 5,505 Hell Hole Wildfire 1975 896 Killian Spring Wildfire 1990 407 Monroe Canyon Wildfire 1996 196 Monroe Mtn. Wildfire 1979 8 Monroe Mtn. Wildfire 1979 67 Oldroyd Wildfire 2000 1,329 Thompson Basin Wildfire 1996 103 Marysvale Peak Wildfire 2005 759 Blackbird Mine Wildfire 2006 1,463 Box Creek Wildfire 2012 1,520    Appendix C Appendix C is a detached excel file: Appendix_C_Range_Analysis_12_11_2014.xlsx  Appendix D Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain 15 January 2014  Goals: • Establish thresholds of maximum percent browse for a given initial (post-treatment) or sustained (untreated ‘stable’ aspen) density of recruits that are expected to result in adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen stand.  • Establish timely adaptive management responses that will take place if thresholds are not met.  • Offer these recommendations fully recognizing that livestock and wildlife management decisions are made within well-established policy structures in USDA-Forest Service and Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, respectively. Needed: Detection methods that document shoot density, height progression, and browsing intensity, as they may vary independently 1) Aspen-mixed conifer post-treatment (prescribed fire and/or mechanical) areas a. Characteristic sprouting: a dense stand of similar-aged (cohort) aspen sprouts, although some stands may exhibit relatively weak sprouting initially due to depleted root systems, genetic variation, shading by conifers, or other factors. b. A proposed quantitative threshold: Use the chart and figure below, adapted from estimation of the maximum browsed aspen allowed that would assure the conservative outcome of at least 400-600 recruits3/acre (i.e. 1,000-1,500 recruits/hectare; Mueggler 1989, Campbell and Bartos 2001) (Attachment A and B). i. Assumptions for the probability table and figure 1. Once a shoot is browsed (majority of top 6” [150 mm] of leaders,) the probability of it recruiting into the overstory is extremely low. 3 A recruit is defined as an aspen shoot that has successfully reached full canopy height. 2. A conservative minimum of 1,000 saplings4/acre (2,500 saplings /ha) is needed to regenerate a fully stocked aspen stand. 3. Unbrowsed shoots will reach a relatively safe height (approximately 6’ or 1.8 m) in 4-6 years. 4. Shoots occur as a single pulse or cohort (same or similar age) of regeneration (no secondary regeneration). 5. There is no mortality to other causes.5 6. The level of browsing as defined by the percent of total shoots browsed is constant (from year to year and across spatial variation in shoot density). 7. Browsers show no preference between browsed and un-browsed shoots. ii. The assumptions will not hold in the field but the table and figure provide an initial basis for deriving appropriate thresholds that predict success or failure for aspen recruitment after treatments (mechanical or fire) that result in a range of initial densities. iii. Application of the table or figure will require a method to select the appropriate number of years (i.e. 4-6) for shoots to attain ‘safe’ heights. This can be based on site productivity, weather conditions, cumulative experience, etc. 4 A sapling is an aspen shoot = 6-12’ (1.8-3.7 m) height 5 It is true that at high densities (e.g. 20,000 shoots per acre), reductions in stem density through natural thinning will be substantial. This thinning will continue in the sapling stage but this is accounted for as the stand can thin from 1,000 to 400-600 stems per acre as the stand matures.   2) Table 1. Suggested annual browse thresholds. Years after which 1,000 aspen saplings (≥6’ tall)/acre will be present  5,000 initial sprouts/ acre 10,000 initial sprouts/ acre 20,000 initial sprouts/  acre 30,000 initial sprouts/ acre 40,000 initial sprouts/ acre percent browse 4 32 43 52 57 60 5 27 36 45 49 52 6 23 31 39 43 45   Figure 1. Projected maximum browse pressure in relation to initial aspen shoot density and time (years) needed for shoots to reach a safe height. c. Suggested browse threshold detection i. Use two perpendicular belt transects (e.g., 6’ x 100’ or 2m x 30m) per plot, and include pellet counts for insight into use by types of ungulates. ii. A minimum of one plot per 300 acres (120 ha) treated, but a greater number of plots when needed to assess percent browse. iii. The plots should reflect the variability of the treatment area. Care should be taken to adequately represent areas of known higher use and/or vulnerability, e.g., <30% slope, <30 pre-treatment aspen stems/acre among the conifer. iv. Browse thresholds for a specific treatment are violated (exceeded) when: 1. Across all plots, average plot browse percentage exceeds the maximum allowable browse threshold calculated from plot shoot density ; or 2. At least 40% of the individual plots associated with the treatment exceed the percent browse threshold.6 v. The above monitoring scheme will be adapted as necessary on the basis of experience using this scheme. d. Browse threshold benchmarks for post-treatment aspen-mixed conifer 6 Both elements of threshold exceedance are important to avoid outliers having determinative influence. i. Browse = apical meristem damaged or removed on a majority of leaders within 6 vertical inches of the tallest leader. ii. More than 20% of sprouts are browsed each year in stands with less than 5,000 initial post-treatment sprouts/acre. iii. More than 27% of sprouts are browsed each year in plots with 5,000- 10,000 initial post-treatment sprouts/acre iv. More than 36% of sprouts are browsed each year in plots with 10,000- 20,000 initial post-treatment sprouts per acre. v. More than 45% of sprouts are browsed each year in plots with more than 20,000 initial post-treatment sprouts per acre. vi. The above percent browse thresholds are comparable to those recommended by Olmstead (1979; 30%), Jones et al. (2005; 20%) and White and Feller (2001) while allowing for a greater range in sprout number. These values should be adapted as necessary on the basis of observed success in stand recruitment. e. Adaptive management i. Scale and timing of aspen restoration treatments: Recognizing that the scale and timing of treatments are likely to affect the level of impact that both wild and domestic grazers have on aspen response to treatments, consider designing treatments that would occur at the largest practical scale (neighborhood of 5,000 acres annually), while still being sensitive to other resource concerns (i.e. aquatics) for any given year. Adaptive management responses and their probability of success are expected to be highly correlated with the location, timing, and scale of treatments. ii. Prior to treatments, recommend to the UDWR, RAC and the Utah Wildlife Board a pre-approved antlerless hunt that could be implemented, if deemed necessary, immediately following treatments in order to reduce browse pressure adequately to facilitate greater aspen recruitment. This recommendation would be subject to the Wildlife Board and RAC approval process. If approved and following treatments, the UDWR, in coordination with the USDA Forest Service, would initiate implementation of the antlerless hunt. iii. Post-treatment period with no livestock use: If browse thresholds are exceeded during the period of rest from livestock use (typically 2 years post-treatment), the USDA Forest Service undertakes one or more of the following adaptive management responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, while avoiding exceeding browse thresholds: a. Recommend to the UDWR, RAC and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. This recommendation would be subject to the Wildlife Board and RAC approval process. b. Co-ordinate with the UDWR to hire/contract adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in treatment areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. c. Treatment areas be fenced for protection. d. Restrict livestock use until aspen recovery objectives are met. iv. Post-treatment period after return of livestock to treatment area(s): If percent browse threshold is exceeded in a treatment area(s) grazed by both wild ungulates and livestock (typically after 2 years posttreatment), the USDA Forest Service undertakes one or more of the following adaptive management responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, while avoiding exceeding browse thresholds: a. Recommend to the UDWR, RAC and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds for combined livestock and wildlife use. This recommendation would be subject to the Wildlife Board and RAC approval process. b. Co-ordinate with the UDWR to hire/contract adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in treatment areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. c. Fence treatment areas. d. Improve time, timing and intensity of livestock grazing. e. Recommend to the UDWR utilize the Grass Bank Program on state Wildlife Management Areas to help offset temporary loss of livestock opportunities.  v. The above mentioned adaptive management responses are not intended to be all inclusive. Additional or alternative adaptive management responses that are proposed, and which have been shown to be effective, should also be considered. vi. After overstory aspen trees are removed or killed (i.e., mechanical or burn treatment), healthy roots systems typically are able to sustain vigorous shoot growth for a limited time (2-3 years,) providing a brief opportunity to modify management when browse pressure exceeds threshold levels. Therefore, the above mentioned potential adaptive management responses have been identified for consideration as timely management responses as each treatment phase is implemented. vii. Although management changes that reduce wild or domestic ungulate numbers may be necessary to restore healthy aspen communities on Monroe Mountain, such changes will be viewed as temporary and will not be interpreted as support for permanent or long-term reductions in stocking levels or population objectives. The Forest Service should be actively engaged in the UDWR’s elk management plan revision process in order to promote understanding and consideration of resource conditions on objectives. viii. If adaptive management responses are needed, the number and type of responses are anticipated to vary depending on location and timing of treatments. Considering the location, size, and timing of treatments, adaptive management responses and the probability of success are expected to vary. Decision authorities for the adaptive management responses also vary. For these reasons, continued and close communication between USDA Forest Service, UDWR, RAC, Utah Wildlife Board and all other interested stake holders is critical. The adaptive management responses are intended to avoid surpassing browse thresholds and to achieve a 1,000 saplings/acre. 3) Stable aspen stand response to changed management of ungulates and of fire and mechanical treatments in aspen-mixed conifer a. Long-term monitoring plots: Sixty long-term monitoring plots will be established to represent the range of conditions thought to occur in stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Aspen stands will be classified as stable when all of the following criteria are met. i. Mature conifer stem counts per unit of area (acre) < 20% of total mature tree stem count (surrogate for BA [basal area] or cover) ii. Total conifer stems (all sizes) < 40/acre (100/ha) iii. Judgment will be used when required. For example, apparent intermixing of stable and seral conditions across uniform topography may require moving the plot to where stable conditions prevail. In addition, the age/size structure of conifer populations might be used supplementally to infer stand stability. Data will be collected on overstory condition, aspen regeneration and recruitment (including browse use), fecal pellets and cow pies and understory for these plots starting in 2013. These data will provide a baseline dataset from which to detect change in subsequent years. Data for aspen shoot density, height, and percent browse will continue to be collected on an annual basis. Overstory and understory data will be collected at longer intervals (3-5 years). b. Stable aspen stand type classification: Although it is well recognized that in many areas stable aspen is not recruiting, it should be assumed that some plots will be located in stands that are appropriately described as self-replacing. Selfreplacing stands may be classified into three basic conceptual types with intermediate conditions expected. These stand types are: 1) stands of dense, even-aged stems that have successfully recruited following recent (10-30+ yrs.) disturbance (e.g. fire or mechanical) to heights that they are now safe from ungulate browse pressure and generally exhibit little or no new regeneration; 2) stands with depleted overstories but with vigorous regeneration and ample stems in the sapling to sub-canopy size classes; or 3) multi-aged stands with stratified canopies (long time since last disturbance). It is essential that we be able to characterize all types of self-replacing, stable aspen stands using reasonable metrics to in turn be able to quantify the variables that will be used in their classification.  i. Stable Aspen stand type 1 (SA1) will have a minimum of 1,000 live stems/ acre (2,470 stems/ha). This is approximately double the density of a fully stocked aspen stand (Mueggler 1989, Guidelines for Aspen Restoration 2010). Subsequently, additional natural thinning is expected. Aspen stands with densities greater than 1,000 live stems/acre are common when vigorous suckering follows disturbance (e.g., fire) in healthy aspen stands and browse impacts remain low. Consequently, tree density is high enough that the absence of active shoot generation in SA1 stands should not be considered a disqualifier for self-replacing status. ii. Stable Aspen stand type 2 (SA2) is what might be expected when stands with depleted overstories exhibit sufficient recruitment that full recovery is expected as stems mature. In general, recruitment synchrony for self-replacing SA2 stands is intermediate between that of the disturbance-initiated SA1 stands and that of the more continuous stable aspen type 3 (SA3) stands described below. The upper density limit for live canopy trees is arbitrarily set at 200/acre for the SA2 stand type, or less than half that of a fully stocked aspen stand. SA2 stands are further sub-divided into four levels based upon the combined density of sapling and sub-canopy trees7 relative to the density of live canopy trees. The levels are defined as follows: full self-replacing (SA2- F) when the combined density of saplings and sub-canopy trees is ≥ 200% of the density of live canopy trees; transitional self-replacing (SA2-T) when the combined density of sapling and sub-canopy trees is ≥ 100% but < 200% of the live canopy-tree density; marginal selfreplacing (SA2-M) when the combined density of sapling and subcanopy trees is ≥ 50% but < 100% of the live canopy-tree density; and non-self-replacing (SA2-N) when the combined density of sapling and sub-canopy trees is < 50% of the live canopy-tree density. 7 Sub-canopy trees are >12’ (3.65 m) in height with crowns clearly below the dominant canopy structure which will vary in height for mature stands with microsite conditions and genotype.   Table 2. Threshold benchmarks for Full, Transitional, and Marginal self-replacing levels of Class 2 stable aspen (SA2). Density of live canopy trees Minimum sapling + sub-canopy tree density for SA2-F level Minimum sapling + sub-canopy tree density for SA2-T level Minimum sapling + sub-canopy tree density for SA2-M level (trees/acre) 200 400 200 100 150 300 150 75 100 200 100 50 50 100 50 25 25 50 25 13  iii. All self-replacing, stable aspen stands not classified as type SA1 or SA2 will by default be classified as stand type 3 (SA3); multi-aged stands with densities that are greater than 200 and less than 1000 live trees/acre. Stratified canopies of continuous or pulsed recruitment and a basal level of new shoot production are descriptive of SA3 stands. In reality SA2 and SA3 stand types represent different segments on a single continuum of overstory condition; however, the corresponding recruitment effort may differ substantially between the two types as a function of overstory live-tree density and corresponding differences in apical dominance. Specifically, as canopy tree density increases for SA2, a corresponding 2-fold increase in recruitment-size stems is required to qualify for the fully self-replacing status. However for SA3 stands, sapling/sub-canopy tree density is expected to decrease with increasing canopy density (Figure 2). Thus at the low end of the SA3 spectrum (200 live canopy trees/acre), a minimum of 400 saplings/sub-canopy trees per acre are required for full self-replacing (SA3-F) status while at the high end (999 live canopy trees/acre) none are required for the same. More specifically, SA3 stands will be assigned to the SA3-F (full self-replacing) level based upon the following equation where (a) = density of live canopy trees and (b) = combined density of saplings and sub-canopy trees.  b ≥ a (-0.5) +500  Stands will be assigned to the SA3-T (transitional self-replacing) level if the sapling + sub-canopy density is at least . of the minimum threshold for F-SR status as indicated by the equation: a (-0.5) + 500 > b ≥ a (-0.25) + 250 Stands will be assigned to the M-SR (marginal self-replacing) level if sapling + sub-canopy density is at least . of the minimum threshold for F-SR status as indicated by the equation: a (-0.25) + 250 > b ≥ a (-0.125) + 125 SA3 stands are assigned to the N-SR (non-self-replacing) level when recruiting stem densities are below the M-SR minimum threshold:   b ≥ a (-0.125) + 125  Table 3. Threshold benchmarks for Full, Transitional, and Marginal self-replacing levels of Class 3 stable aspen (SA3). Density of live canopy trees Minimum sapling + sub-canopy tree density for SA3-F level Minimum sapling + sub-canopy tree density for SA3-T level Minimum sapling + sub-canopy tree density for SA3-M level (trees/acre) 200 400 200 100 400 300 150 75 600 200 100 50 800 100 50 25 1000 0 0 0   c. Stable aspen improvement thresholds: Using 2013 (and possibly 2014) monitoring data, each of the 60 stable aspen plots will be classified into the appropriate class and level based upon live canopy tree and recruitment (saplings + sub-canopy trees) densities as described above. Although monitoring will continue on all plots, those plots initially classified as SA1 or SA2/SA3 level F (fully self-replacing), will not be used to determine treatmentrelated improvement in stable aspen because it is assumed that these plots are already fully self-replacing.  Improvement for the subset of plots initially classified in levels T (transitional), M (marginal), and N (non-self-replacing) will be recognized and documented when plots move upward from one level to another (N to M, M to T, T to F). Similarly, degradation will be acknowledged if plots drop a level. i. A minimum benchmark of success in restoring stable aspen on Monroe Mountain will be that average improvement for all eligible plots (SA2 and SA3 levels T, M, and N) must be equal to one full level increase as a benefit of the project. Thus, for every plot that fails to move up a level, another will have to move up two levels. Plot degradation (drop in levels) will also be factored in. ii. It is not acceptable to have to wait 10-15 years until the entire Monroe Mountain project is completed to determine the degree to which it has been successful. A process must be adopted to incrementally assess whether management actions are leading to the desired outcome and, if not, additional management actions on the mountain will be warranted. iii. Aspen response (including stable aspen) should be proportional to the area treated (as a percent of the total area planned for treatment) across the duration of the project. It may not be possible to accurately predict how browse relief will be distributed spatially. Therefore, stable aspen improvement should be interpreted at the broadest spatial scale (all 60 plots). For example, one scenario might allow that 10% of the area planned for treatment, be treated. Assuming in the same scenario that 50 of the 60 stable aspen plots are classified as being eligible for improvement (as defined above) then an expectation for reclassification to at least one level higher might be expected for a minimum of 5 (10%) of the 50 eligible plots, with no plots being downgraded in response to this first year of treatment. It is anticipated that level changes may be detectable within 3 years of treatment. d. Adaptive management: A failure to detect sufficient improvement after an appropriate lag time (allowing some flexibility for unknowns such as extreme weather events) will trigger a recommendation for an appropriate adaptive management response(s) (selecting from the adaptive management responses listed above) to temporarily reduce browse pressure by domestic and/or wild ungulates sufficient to allow for stable aspen recovery. These recommendations will not be interpreted as endorsement of permanent changes in livestock or wildlife management. As additional area is treated, a proportionate increase will be expected in the number of plots that improve sufficiently to warrant reclassification to a higher level. A lag period of approximately 3 years will continue to be employed for each treatment. Hypothetically, this could result in a recommendation to reduce browse pressure after treatment of seral aspen stands even when aspen recovery within the treatment area is satisfactory but where there is no corresponding improvement in stable aspen monitoring plots. The opposite is also possible, that is we could have improvement in stable aspen but unsatisfactory results in the treated area. Either way, under these conditions management actions designed to reduce browse pressure would be desirable. e. Boundaries described herein between stable aspen classes and levels of recruitment, though somewhat artificial, are based upon expert opinion and best science available. These boundaries are subject to modification if sitespecific data from stable aspen plots and/or exclosures provide clear rationale for doing so. The lag period (3 years) between treatment and time of expected recruitment enhancement may also be adjusted with experience. In such cases, proposed changes and supporting rationale will be documented and subject to review prior to implementation. For this reason, continued and close communication between USDA Forest Service, UDWR, RAC, Utah Wildlife Board and all other interested stake holders is critical. f. Stable aspen classes and recruitment levels are based directly upon the densities of stems that reach relatively safe heights and will not initially take into account the browse intensity values that will clearly influence those densities. Patterns in annual browse data will be analyzed over time with the objective of determining how they might be incorporated to improve assessments of stable aspen condition and trajectory on Monroe Mountain.  Figure 2.   Literature Cited  Campbell, R.B. and D.L. Bartos. 2001. Aspen ecosystems: objectives for sustaining biodiversity. In W. D. Shepperd, W.D. Binkley, D.L. Bartos, T.J. Stohlgren, and L.G. Eskew (comps.) Sustaining Aspen in Western Landscapes: Symposium Proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. p. 299-307.  Jones, B.E., D. Burton, and K.W. Tate. 2005. Effectiveness monitoring of aspen regeneration on managed rangelands – a monitoring method for determining if management objectives are being met in aspen communities. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Region. 19 p.  Mueggler, W.F. 1989. Age distribution and reproduction of Intermountain aspen stands. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 4:41-45.  Olmstead, C.E. 1979. The ecology of aspen with reference to utilization by large herbivores in Rocky Mountain National Park. In M.S. Boyce, L.D. Hayden-Wing, (eds.) North American elk: ecology, behavior, and management: Laramie, WY. University of Wyoming. p. 89-97.  White, C.A. and M.C. Feller. 2001. Predation risk and elk-aspen foraging patterns. In W. D. Shepperd, W.D. Binkley, D.L. Bartos, T.J. Stohlgren, and L.G. Eskew (comps.) Sustaining Aspen in Western Landscapes: Symposium Proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. Fort Collins, CO: USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. p. 61-80. Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project - Range Analysis - Appendix C Alternative 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Allotment Name Pasture Name Total Pasture Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of Pasture Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of Pasture Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of Pasture Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of Pasture Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of Pasture Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of Pasture Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of Pasture Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of Pasture Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of Pasture Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of Pasture Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of Pasture Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of Pasture Being Treated Buck Hollow 2,652 0  - 0% 301 180 7% 7% - 0% 301 180 7% 7% - 0% 301 180 7% 7% - 0% 3 01 1 80 7% 7% Dry Lake Dyches Draw 1,209 0 2 0 2% 763 458 38% 40% 25 2% 784 470 39% 41% 25 2% 784 470 39% 41% 2 29 19% 5 55 3 33 28% 46% Little Pole 1,386 0 - 0% 37 2 2 2% 2% - 0% 37 22 2% 2% - 0% 37 22 2% 2% - 0% 37 22 2% 2% Pine Canyon 1,288 0 - 0% 38 2 3 2% 2% - 0% 38 23 2% 2% - 0% 38 23 2% 2% - 0% 38 23 2% 2% Tuft Draw 1,847 0 1 4 1% 984 591 32% 33% 40 2% 998 599 32% 35% 40 2% 998 599 32% 35% 1 33 7% 8 66 5 19 28% 35% Forshea Tibadore 8,202 0 4 2 1% 973 584 7% 8% 56 1% 1 ,014 608 7% 8% 56 1% 1 ,014 609 7% 8% 1 15 1% 8 99 5 39 7% 8% Bell Rock 1,146 0 - 0% 21 1 3 1% 1% - 0% 21 13 1% 1% - 0% 21 13 1% 1% - 0% 21 13 1% 1% Glenwood Big Lake 2,105 0 6 03 29% 310 186 9% 37% 752 36% 282 169 8% 44% 820 39% 219 131 6% 45% 8 71 41% 40 24 1% 43% Circle 3,562 0 2 79 8% 1 ,568 941 26% 34% 530 15% 1 ,433 860 24% 39% 1 ,236 35% 865 519 15% 49% 4 15 12% 1,433 8 60 24% 36% Davis Hollow 1,770 0 1 23 7% 68 4 1 2% 9% 211 12% 19 11 1% 13% 220 12% 20 12 1% 13% 1 71 10% 19 11 1% 10% Section 5 2,066 0 5 34 26% 382 229 11% 37% 1 ,261 61% 201 120 6% 67% 1 ,775 86% 30 18 1% 87% 8 45 41% 68 41 2% 43% Hunts Lake Hunts Lake 7,413 0 2 40 3% 3 ,078 1,847 25% 28% 735 10% 2 ,844 1 ,706 23% 33% 1 ,322 18% 2 ,441 1 ,465 20% 38% 8 09 11% 2,770 1,662 22% 33% Box Creek 7,908 0 2 4 0% 229 137 2% 2% 24 0% 229 137 2% 2% 24 0% 229 137 2% 2% 24 0% 2 29 1 37 2% 2% Koosharem Burnt Flat 4,539 0 1,686 37% 218 131 3% 40% 1 ,687 37% 217 130 3% 40% 1 ,687 37% 217 130 3% 40% 1,687 37% 2 17 1 30 3% 40% Dairies 4,212 0 1 8 0% 489 293 7% 7% 18 0% 489 293 7% 7% 18 0% 489 293 7% 7% 18 0% 4 89 2 93 7% 7% Greenwich-Squaw Spring 4,654 0 1,585 34% 370 222 5% 39% 1 ,658 36% 379 227 5% 41% 1 ,768 38% 376 225 5% 43% 1,575 34% 3 79 2 27 5% 39% Indian Ranch 1,062 0 2 0 2% 60 3 6 3% 5% 23 2% 61 37 3% 6% 75 7% 39 23 2% 9% 19 2% 61 37 3% 5% Koosharem Canyon 11,340 0 5 7 1% 240 144 1% 2% 54 0% 243 146 1% 2% 54 0% 243 146 1% 2% 54 0% 2 43 1 46 1% 2% Monroe Creek 3,900 0 6 56 17% 1 ,468 881 23% 39% 1 ,302 33% 1 ,373 824 21% 55% 2 ,468 63% 488 293 8% 71% 1,679 43% 4 36 2 61 7% 50% Rim Seep 2,184 0 2 95 13% 8 5 0% 14% 295 13% 8 5 0% 14% 295 13% 8 5 0% 14% 2 95 13% 8 5 0% 14% Big Flat 1,255 0 5 8 5% 638 383 31% 35% 219 17% 657 394 31% 49% 219 17% 657 394 31% 49% 1 65 13% 5 30 3 18 25% 38% Manning Creek Big Table 1,359 0 4 3 3% 372 223 16% 20% 302 22% 413 248 18% 40% 572 42% 413 248 18% 60% 1 43 11% 2 70 1 62 12% 22% Little Table 1,768 0 - 0% 49 2 9 2% 2% 0% 49 29 2% 2% - 0% 49 29 2% 2% - 0% 49 29 2% 2% Manning Creek 1,659 0 1 8 1% 609 365 22% 23% 19 1% 627 376 23% 24% 19 1% 627 376 23% 24% 53 3% 5 74 3 44 21% 24% Manning Meadows 1,758 0 5 3 3% 516 310 18% 21% 313 18% 412 247 14% 32% 800 46% 58 35 2% 47% 2 89 16% 3 12 1 87 11% 27% Smith Canyon 2,551 0 - 0% 4 2 0% 0% 0% 4 2 0% 0% - 0% 4 2 0% 0% - 0% 4 2 0% 0% Windy Ridge 3,800 0 6 0 2% 1 ,067 640 17% 18% 94 2% 1 ,122 673 18% 20% 94 2% 1 ,122 673 18% 20% 4 76 13% 6 51 3 90 10% 23% Marysvale Marysvale Peak 9,589 0 4 0 0% 3 ,714 2,228 23% 24% 226 2% 3 ,649 2 ,189 23% 25% 437 5% 3 ,475 2 ,085 22% 26% 4 47 5% 3,312 1,987 21% 25% Monument-Glenwood Monument-Glenwood 11,129 0 5 68 5% 5 ,347 3,208 29% 34% 1 ,896 17% 4 ,178 2 ,507 23% 40% 3 ,262 29% 2 ,991 1 ,794 16% 45% 2,211 20% 3,703 2,222 20% 40% Bean Hill 3,346 0 5 16 15% 777 466 14% 29% 606 18% 826 496 15% 33% 668 20% 826 496 15% 35% 6 41 19% 6 49 3 89 12% 31% Rock Springs Spring 2,864 0 1 0 0% 424 254 9% 9% 42 1% 432 259 9% 11% 42 1% 432 259 9% 11% 3 0% 4 29 2 57 9% 9% Wills Resevoir 2,663 0 4 04 15% 432 259 10% 25% 753 28% 502 301 11% 40% 1 ,022 38% 502 301 11% 50% 7 98 30% 36 21 1% 31% Scrub Flat Scrub Flat 8,723 0 1 55 2% 4 ,213 2,528 29% 31% 421 5% 4 ,227 2 ,536 29% 34% 681 8% 4 ,136 2 ,482 28% 36% 8 25 9% 3,541 2,124 24% 34% East 1,449 0 - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% Kingston Middle 1,573 0 - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% Pole Canyon 2,283 0 - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% South 1,777 0 - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% West 3,660 0 - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% - 0% - - 0% 0% None None 38,055 0 6 4 0% 3 ,223 1,934 5% 5% 81 0% 3 ,287 1 ,972 5% 5% 134 0% 3 ,286 1 ,972 5% 6% 81 0% 3,287 1,972 5% 5% 175,706 0 8,183 5% 32,991 1 9,795 11% 16% 13,644 8% 31,355 18,813 11% 18% 19,834 11% 27,435 16,461 9% 21% 15,069 9% 26,453 15,872 9% 18% Total Appendix M – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Recreation Specialist Report (Christensen 2015b)   Prepared by:  Dave A. Christensen Fishlake Forest Recreation Specialist  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 7, 2015             Executive Summary The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on the Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. The area affected by the proposal includes Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits.  This report considers potential effects to recreation resources as a result of the no action and four action alternatives of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. Mechanical treatments would affect 5% to 11% of the project area. Prescribed fire would affect 15% to 19% of the project area. Stumps and burn piles would be noticeable as well as a charred landscape in the treated areas. Treatments would be completed in a mosaic pattern and would over time improve plant size, age and species diversity. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Stumps would be cut mostly flush with the ground. Tracked vehicles would be used for mechanical treatments and temporary roads would be reclaimed. The effects would quickly lessen as vegetation grows and would be the same or better than current conditions within three to five years. The four action alternatives (including mechanical options 1 & 2) would disrupt recreation use during implementation, yet would return to normal after completion. The annual Rocky Mountain ATV Jamboree is held the third week of September. Hundreds of participants ride the Monroe Mountain and would be affected by closures and smoke if project activities take place during that week. Hunting during the late summer and fall months would be affected by closures and smoke during implementation. Trails may need clearing plus signs and blazes replaced or cairns installed after project implementation. Based upon my findings, I conclude the action alternatives would move conditions closer to desired conditions in all measures evaluated. All of the action alternatives comply with the Forest Plan in that forest resource uses or activities should meet recreation objectives. Burning and mechanical treatments will enhance aspen ecosystems and over time maintain or improve recreation resources. No action would result in a much slower movement towards desired conditions and desired conditions would not be achieved in the foreseeable future. Recreation resources would remain unchanged. Introduction Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. Of these 175,706 acres, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres on Monroe Mountain. Soil survey information was used to estimate the historic occurrence of aspen. It is widely recognized that aspen ecosystems are capable of supporting one of the largest arrays of plant and animal species due to its high productivity and structural diversity. However, it is also widely recognized that aspen ecosystems have been in decline throughout the Intermountain West during the twentieth century. On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to, (1) conifer encroachment due to reduced fire, and (2) lack of recruitment due to domestic and wild browsing by cattle, sheep, elk, and deer. Absence of fire and overbrowsing has been identified by the District as the primary underlying causes for aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain being at risk. Aspen of 5 to 15 feet in height (“recruitment”) are uncommon on Monroe Mountain, despite continued sprouting of aspen (“regeneration”). Due to high cost and continual maintenance, fencing is not a long-term sustainable response option for protecting aspen sprouts from overbrowsing, and does not address underlying causes of the lack of recruitment.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain. Aspen ecosystems support the highest level of biodiversity for interior western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e. 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. Mechanical treatments can also be an effective disturbance tool for aspen restoration. Regulatory Framework The Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Plan (LRMP 1986) in Forest Direction Goals for Recreation states the following (Page IV-3): • Provide motorized recreation opportunities. • Bring off-road vehicle (ORV) use into harmony with land capability. • Provide for non-motorized recreation opportunities in selected areas. • Manage the land and activities on it, including visitor use, to achieve desired physical and social recreation settings. • Provide additional sites and facilities on the Forest. • Provide trailhead (motorized and on-motorized use) with facilities for winter and summer use. • Provide and manage opportunities for winter recreation uses. • Inform the public about physical, historic and resource management activities of the Fishlake National Forest. • Provide a trail system for public resource needs. • Encourage private enterprise to provide needed recreation services not traditionally supplied by the Forest Service.  Resource Issues and Purpose and Need  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described in the EIS. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to:  • Improving and increasing the amount of habitat for wildlife species dependent upon aspen ecosystems (i.e., mule deer, elk, and Northern goshawk); • Improving and increasing the amount of habitat and forage for domestic ungulates (i.e., cattle and sheep); • Improving native species diversity; • Reducing hazardous fuel accumulations; • Reducing the risk for large-scale, intense wildland fires. This results in lower risk to the safety of the public and firefighters. This also results in lower risk to sensitive wildlife species (i.e. Northern goshawk, Western Boreal toad (Bufo boreas), and Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)); and, • Increasing the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (Utah Fire Plan 2001).  The interdisciplinary team reviewed the scoping comments from public individuals, interest groups, local governments, and other agencies, to develop a list of issues to address. The issues were separated into two groups: key and non-key issues. Key issues were defined as those directly or indirectly caused by implementing the proposed action. Non-key issues were identified as those: (1) Addressed through Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) or implementation of LRMP standards and guidelines and best management practices; (2) Addressed through implementation of project-specific mitigation measures/design features; (3) Addressed during processes or analyses routinely conducted by an interdisciplinary team; (4) Addressed through spatial location of activities during alternative design; (5) Beyond the scope of the project; or (6) general comment. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA regulations explain these delineations in Sec. 1501.7, “…identify, and eliminate from detailed study the issues which are not significant or which have been covered by prior environmental review (Sec. 1506.3)…” A list of non-key issues and reasons regarding their categorization as non-significant is in the project record. Following are the key issues identified by the public and used to focus the analysis or drive alternative development.  Key Issues:  • Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation. • Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property. • Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced. • Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and Boreal toad habitat being severely degraded. • Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen sprouts post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. • Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (2 or more growing seasons). • Project activities may result in adverse impacts old growth characteristics. Overview of the Proposed Action The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues, and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments (see chapter 2 of the EIS for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative).  Addressing the reduced occurrence of wildland fire due to an increase in wildland fire suppression on Monroe Mountain is critical to the long-term restoration of aspen ecosystems. The average fire return intervals for each of the vegetation cover types occurring on Monroe Mountain can be found in chapter 1 of the EIS. This table also shows that the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer, thinning to a Basal Area of 90, and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch DBH, using group, and singletree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years. This number is well within the Forest Service recommended range of area to treat within a 5-year period of 5,000 to 24,000 acres (see chapter 2 of the EIS for a detailed description of the proposed action and alternatives).  Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the alternative (see chapter 2 of the EIS for specific road locations, mileage, and specifications). In addition, temporary fencing would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (see chapter 2 of the EIS for fencing locations, mileage, and specifications).  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management). See chapter 2 of the EIS for a detailed description of the District’s proposal to address overbrowsing of aspen. Affected Environment & Direct/Indirect Effects Recreation/Trails/Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS): The Monroe Mountain is valuable for multiple recreation uses. Roads and trails provide access to private lands and cabins, reservoirs and streams, dispersed camping, hunting, fishing, viewing scenery, driving for pleasure, hiking, horseback riding, off highway vehicle use, and various other recreation opportunities. The no action alternative would not change current recreation opportunities or ROS. The four action alternatives (including mechanical options 1 & 2) could disrupt recreation use during implementation, yet would return to normal after completion. The annual Rocky Mountain ATV Jamboree is held the third week of September. Hundreds of participants ride the Monroe Mountain and would be affected by closures and smoke if project activities take place during that week. Hunting during the late summer and fall months would be affected by closures and smoke during implementation. Trails may need clearing plus signs and blazes replaced or cairns installed after implementation. Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS): The Monroe Mountain is currently mapped as Roaded Natural 14%, Semi-Primitive Motorized 42%, Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized 37%, and Private Land 7%. The proposed project would not change the current draft ROS designations. Map 1 shows the current draft ROS location and designations.   Map 1: Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) Monroe Mountain Designations                           Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives Past, present and reasonable foreseeable actions (See EIS for a list of actions) on the Monroe Mountain were reviewed to determine the cumulative effects to recreation resources. Impacts from natural events, human activities, and forest management activities have created the current recreation opportunities and draft ROS designations. The action alternatives and reasonably foreseeable actions would not permanently lower the current recreation resources and draft ROS designations. Desired Condition The desired condition as stated in the Forest Plan is that current recreation resource uses such as roads and trails, dispersed camping, hunting, fishing, viewing scenery, driving for pleasure, hiking, horseback riding, and off highway vehicle use should continue and possibly be enhanced. Therefore, due to implementation of this project recreation resources and draft ROS designations on the Monroe Mountain would be maintained. Burning and mechanical treatments would enhance aspen ecosystems and over time maintain or possibly improve recreation resources. Conclusions Proposed activities of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not permanently lower recreation opportunities on the Monroe Mountain, yet they could temporarily disrupt them during implementation. This report considers potential effects to recreation resources as a result of the no action and four action alternatives of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. Mechanical treatments would affect 5% to 11% of the project area. Prescribed fire would affect 15% to 19% of the project area. Stumps and burn piles would be noticeable as well as a charred landscape in the treated areas. Treatments would be completed in a mosaic pattern and would over time improve plant size, age and species diversity. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Stumps would be cut mostly flush with the ground. Tracked vehicles would be used for mechanical treatments and temporary roads would be reclaimed. The effects would quickly lessen as vegetation grows and would be the same or better than current conditions within three to five years. The four action alternatives (including mechanical options 1 & 2) would disrupt recreation use during implementation, yet would return to normal after completion. The annual Rocky Mountain ATV Jamboree is held the third week of September. Hundreds of participants ride the Monroe Mountain and would be affected by closures and smoke if project activities take place during that week. Hunting during the late summer and fall months would be affected by closures and smoke during implementation. Trails may need clearing plus signs and blazes replaced or cairns installed after project implementation. Based upon my findings, I conclude the action alternatives would move conditions closer to desired conditions in all measures evaluated. All of the action alternatives comply with the Forest Plan in that forest resource uses or activities should meet recreation objectives. Burning and mechanical treatments will enhance aspen ecosystems and over time maintain or improve recreation resources. No action would result in a much slower movement towards desired conditions and desired conditions would not be achieved in the foreseeable future. Recreation resources would remain unchanged. Compliance with the Forest Plan and Other Regulatory Direction As described in chapter 1 of the EIS, the desired conditions and the purpose and need for this project are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in chapter IV of the LRMP, and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). The District has also compared the action alternatives with the general direction and the standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP to determine compliance, and found that the action alternatives are compliant with the LRMP. This review, along with supporting rationale is found in the project record. Literature cited USDA, Forest Service, 1986, Land and Resource Management Plan for the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah USDA, Forest Service, 1986, ROS Book, Washington DC Appendix N – Vegetation and Climate Change Specialist Report (Holsclaw 2015)      Prepared by:  Terrance C. Holsclaw Forester  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 5, 2015          Executive Summary The vegetation portion of this report directly and indirectly addresses two issues identified during scoping. They are, Issue 3- project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced and Issue 7- project activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics. This report directly addresses Issue 7 and provides the District Wildlife Biologist information that can assist in addressing Issue 3 related to Northern goshawks. Cover types are discussed and analyzed throughout the document. The three dominant cover types within the project area are aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir. This report addresses the effects of options 1 and 2 for alternatives 2 through 5 when compared to alternative 1 (no action) within each cover type. Other items of concern addressed are fire effects, economics and climate change. Environmental indicators were developed based on the issues. The vegetation portion of this report analyzes the structural component for Issue 3, commonly referred to as Vegetative Structural Stages (VSS). The vegetation portion also analyzes impacts to old growth. Vegetative Structural Stages for all options and action alternatives resulted in trends toward the desired conditions for VSS. All options and action alternatives exceeded the desired conditions for old growth. Introduction See chapter 1 of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). Regulatory Framework Refer to EIS. Methodology for Analysis The primary source of information for the analysis in this report is derived from common stand exam (CSE) data. Data was collected during the 2013 field season. The project area was divided into thirds providing a northern, central and southern section. Stands were chosen by cover type within each zone ensuring that we had a sample that covered the entire project area. The goal was to collect data on 10 percent of the stands and 10 percent of the acres by cover type across the project area. The cover types targeted were: 1) aspen (stable and seral), 2) spruce/fir, and 3) mixed conifer. Data was collected using random plot sampling and a common stand exam recommendation of 1 plot per 10 acres with a minimum of 3 plots for those stands less than 30 acres (NRIS 2013). It is the professional opinion of the District Forester that this sampling is representative of the above cover types and is sufficient for analyzing the entire project area. Data derived from CSE was used in the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) model. This is a growth and yield model able to calculate the growth and yield of stands through time. The FVS model is also capable of modeling different management alternatives and silvicultural systems and project them through time. Many years of research have gone into the development of the FVS model and it is very good at calculating growth and yield. The model uses the common stand exam data to project growth and yield; however, (with the exception of species that sucker (mainly aspen and oaks)) it cannot predict the amount or input regeneration through time. Because the model behaves in this way, trees that are removed due to harvest, fire, and/or density mortality, etc., are not replaced. When projected through time, it will eventually run out of trees and outputs can then become erroneous and unreliable. With that said, assumptions were made concerning regeneration. The assumptions are based on experience related to regeneration density and survival rates, the Fishlake Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP), and input from the Interdisciplinary Team. The assumptions are based on cover types to maintain consistency with this report and the LRMP. Aspen Cover Type- minimum average of 5,000 suckers (aspen trees less than 6 feet in height) per acre. This number is outlined as the desired condition for this project. The LRMP outlines a minimum value of 300 seedlings per acre with a desired of 600 seedlings per acre (pg. IV-32). Spruce/fir Cover Type- Natural regeneration (stocking) of 155 seedlings per acre (pg. IV-32 of LRMP). Mixed Conifer- Natural regeneration (stocking) of 215 seedlings per acre (pg. IV-32 of LRMP). Photos taken during CSE data collection were also used in this analysis to illustrate stands as examples of composition, structure, etc. These photos are included in the project record. Geographic Information System (GIS) information was also used as part of the analysis. This use would be in the form of maps. These maps are included in the project record. Resource Issues and Purpose and Need The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions as described in the EIS. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to:  1. Improving and increasing the amount of habitat for wildlife species dependent upon aspen ecosystems (i.e., mule deer, elk, and Northern goshawk); 2. Improving and increasing the amount of habitat and forage for domestic ungulates (i.e., cattle and sheep); 3. Improving native species diversity; 4. Reducing hazardous fuel accumulations; 5. Reducing the risk for large-scale, intense wildland fires. This results in lower risk to the safety of the public and firefighters. This also results in lower risk to sensitive wildlife species (i.e. Northern goshawk, Western Boreal toad (Bufo boreas), and Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)); and, 6. Increasing the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (Utah Fire Plan 2001).  Timeframes and Spatial Boundaries See timeframes and spatial boundaries in the EIS.  Environmental Indicators There are two environmental indicators being looked at for comparison in this specialist report. They are: 1) vegetative structural stages (VSS), and 2) old growth. The following will explain why each is an indicator to be measured. 1. Vegetative Structural Stages- VSS is used to determine the effects on stand structure. Most of the project area overlaps to one degree or the other and must be analyzed according to the LRMP. The measure of VSS are 1, 10 percent; VSS 2, 10 percent; VSS 3, 20 percent; VSS 4, 20 percent; VSS 5, 20 percent; and VSS 6, 20 percent. The measure of VSS can be found in the LRMP 2. Old growth- This is being analyzed to address an issue from scoping. The LRMP also states on page IV-11, General Direction, Diversity on National Forests that in forested areas of a unit, 5 percent or more should be in Old Growth. Overview of the Proposed Action The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands (see chapter 1 of the EIS). Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues, and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments. Please see chapter 2 of the EIS for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative. Design Features See designed features outlined in the EIS. Monitoring See monitoring plan in the EIS.  Affected Environment Before a discussion in this section can occur, a few definitions are in order. Throughout this document, forest cover types will be discussed. The definition for this term comes from the Forest Cover Types of the United States and Canada (Eyre 1980). All other definitions come from The Dictionary of Forestry (Helms 1998). • Cover types- a category of forest defined by its vegetation (particularly its composition) and or locality (environmental) factors; a descriptive classification of forestland based on present occupancy of an area by tree species. Forest types are named after predominant tree species. Predominance was determined by basal area. • Succession-the gradual supplanting of one community of plants by another. • Climax- an ecological community that represents the culminating stage of a natural forest succession for its locality, i.e., for its environment. • Seral- a temporal and intermediate stage in the process of succession. • Niche- the specific spot occupied by an individual organism. • Uneven-aged stand- a stand with trees of three or more distinct age classes, either intimately mixed, or in small groups. • Even-aged stand- a stand of trees composed of a single age-class in which the range of tree ages is approximately 20 percent of rotation. • Stand Structure- the horizontal and vertical distribution components of a forest stand including the height, diameter, crown layers, - stems of trees, shrubs, herbaceous understory, snags, and down woody debris. There are three primary cover types affected by this project. They are 1) aspen, 2) spruce/fir, and 3) mixed conifer. The “Other” cover type, in Figure 1 below, designates areas where sagebrush, woodlands (primarily pinyon and juniper, Gambel oak, and mahogany), grasses and rocks are the primary cover types (in terms of acres). The “Other” also covers areas where ponderosa pine and white fir exist. Although this “Other” cover type exist within the project area, most aspen reside in the first three cover types. It is also known that ponderosa pine exist in the project area; however, it was not detected within any of the surveys. Aspen restoration is the primary focus of this project. Factors influencing these cover types are insect and disease, slope, aspect, environmental factors such as temperature, drought, frost, etc., fire, ungulate grazing and management.  8% 27% 3% 62% Project Area Forest Cover Types Spruce-fir Aspen Mixed Conifer Other  Figure 1- Cover types within the project area. Aspen Cover Type The aspen cover type comprises 48,138 acres or 27 percent of the total acres for the project area (see Figure 1). Aspen is considered to exist in either a seral or stable state. A seral state has conifer encroachment. The degree of conifer encroachment is primarily dependent upon where it is at in its successional stage. On the other hand, stable aspen have few if any conifers. Aspen exists typically in even-aged stands (unusually over 40 years of age) in the Utah region, indicating their origin from burns. Two-storied stands are also common (Campbell 1995). Whether aspen is seral or stable, current structure within the project area is uneven-aged. Uneven-aged structure is characterized by a range of tree sizes occurring throughout a stand (Tappeiner et al. 2007). This structure is graphed in Figure 2 (trees per acre over diameter at breast height (DBH)) and has an inverse-J shape (common for uneven-aged stands). As Campbell (1995) states, this structure is most likely occurring due to fire exclusion where there is an uneven-aged understory and the overstory decays leaving an uneven-aged stand. It is likely this cover type is in the later seral stage.   2 4 6 8 10 12 14 TPA 123 293 140 66 70 49 4.3 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 Trees Per Acre Current Stable Aspen Structure 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 TPA 20 11 10 54 38 20 87 29 6 4 2 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 Trees Per Acre Current Seral Aspen Structure 29% 4% 67% Current Understory Composition of Aspen Cover Type AS ES AF 0% 49% 1% 50% Current Overstory Composition of Aspen Cover Type DF AS ES AF   Figure 2- Current structure of stable and seral aspen within project area. There are more stands of seral aspen within the project area than there are stable stands. While aspen comprises most of the vegetation within the project area, they are being over taken by conifers. Without disturbance, this is a natural successional pathway where conifers eventually take over the stand and become the climax for those sites. Seral stands within the project area are composed of four species. They are aspen (AS), Engelmann spruce (ES), Douglas fir (DF) and subalpine fir (SF). All the aspen stands combined show understory composition comprised of 67 percent AF; 29 percent AS; and 4 percent ES. Overstory composition is comprised of 50 percent SF; 49 percent AS; 1 percent ES; and less than 1 percent DF (shows 0 (zero) percent because of rounding). See Figure 3. For clarification, the cutoff for understory and overstory trees was 0 to 7.9 inch DBH and 8 inch and above DBH respectively.   Figure 3- Seral aspen composition in percent for project area. Conditions on Monroe Mountain are different today than they were before Euro-American settlement (150 years ago). Differences include changes in human uses, disturbance (fire) regimes, climatic conditions, and species and density of herbivores. Within aspen, historical fire regimes are mixed severity. Fire was likely a major component in the structuring of the landscape prior to humans arriving on the scene (Bartos and Campbell 1998). Historically, fire was likely the primary disturbance that promoted sprouting, reduced conifer cover, and changed structure on the landscape. Since fire has been largely absent or suppressed on much of the F:\COMMON STAND EXAM PICTURES\MONROE ASPEN\PLot 2 Stand 0029 Comp 006.JPGF:\COMMON STAND EXAM PICTURES\MONROE ASPEN\Plot# 5; Stand# 0026; Compartment# 075\Plot# 5; Stand# 0026; Compartment# 075 (1).JPGmountain, conifers have encroached and in some cases, overtaken aspen and become dominant on a given site. Although aspen is the cover type, there are some differences in how seral and stable stands behave when confronted by disturbance. Those differences are outlined below as they relate to current conditions.  Conifer encroachment, as stated previously, occurs naturally due to conifers shade tolerance. This phenomenon occurs in seral stands and typically not stable. Fires tend to check conifer encroachment in seral stands and reset them to young even-aged stands. Fires also resulted in less conifer cover, more aspen cover and a greater diversity of understory plants. With the exception of riparian areas, aspen communities are considered the most biologically diverse ecosystems in the Intermountain West (Campbell and Bartos 2001). Fire suppression has resulted in more conifer cover and less historical aspen and less understory plant diversity on Monroe Mountain. This has decreased the forage base and put more pressure on other forage, such as aspen regeneration. Figure 4 is an example of a seral aspen stand on Monroe Mountain. Conifer species associated with this stand are subalpine fir with minor components of Engelmann spruce, ponderosa pine, Douglas fir and white fir.    Figure 4- Examples of current condition within seral aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Quaking aspen fuel types have relatively low flammability, and stand-replacing crown fires do not carry well through the canopies of aspen-dominated forests (Margolis, et al 2007). In addition to their high moisture content and herbaceous understory, aspen stands act as fire breaks (Morelli 2009). Crown fires often become surface fires when they run into aspen stands. Fires have been observed to change direction or extinguish when coming in contact with aspen stands. Consequently, aspen stands are often used as live fuel breaks. This is most likely to occur where stands are more pure or are not far along in the successional stage. Consequently, fire has played a larger role in the development of seral than in stable aspen stands. That is not to say that some stable stands have not been affected by fire, it is just that they have not been the primary driver in their development. Most fires in stable stands are carried by fine fuels because conifers are generally lacking. Stable aspen stands tend to be self-replacing with multiple layers. Disturbances such as frost, drought, and insect and disease can initiate regeneration through a period of time that creates this multi-layered appearance. Generally, the multi-layered appearances within stable aspen stands are lacking. An increase in conifer encroachment within seral stands has resulted in reductions in grasses, forbs, and shrubs and thus has resulted in a change in the grazing pattern. More focus by domestic and wild ungulates has been placed where more forage is available, such as stable aspen F:\COMMON STAND EXAM PICTURES\MONROE ASPEN\Plot 2 stand 0007, comp 065 (2).JPGF:\COMMON STAND EXAM PICTURES\MONROE ASPEN\plot 2 stand 0006, comp 065 (2).JPGstands. It is the professional opinion of the District Forester that the lack of available forage in the seral stands is caused by a lack of disturbance. The results of this can be seen in the left photo in Figure 5, where grasses are the primary understory species with little regeneration and recruitment. The right photo is an example of what a multi-storied stable stand should look like.   Figure 5- Examples of current conditions within stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Spruce/fir The spruce/fir cover type is comprised of 13,667 or 8 percent of the total acres for the project (Figure 1). The spruce/fir type is widespread in the central and southern Rocky Mountains. The spruce/fir type also occurs in the high mountains of Utah and eastern Nevada (Alexander 1987). This type is dominated by Engelmann spruce or subalpine fir. In the central and southern Rocky Mountains, Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir occurs as either co-dominants or in nearly pure stands of one or the other. Elsewhere in the Rocky Mountains and associated ranges, subalpine fir is the major climax species (Alexander 1987). Aspen and other conifers such as Douglas fir, white fir and blue spruce may also be present. In the case of Monroe Mountain, the cover type (for those stands surveyed) identified subalpine fir as the dominant species in the type. Figures 6 and 7 show current conditions in the spruce/fir type.    Figure 6- Example of current conditions for spruce/fir type on Monroe Mountain.   0% 30% 2% 68% Current Conditions for Spruce-fir Cover Type DF AS ES AF 0% 29% 2% 69% Current Understory For Spruce-fir Cover Type DF AS ES AF 0% 41% 14% 45% Current Overstory For Spruce-fir Cover Type DF AS ES AF Understory is dominated by subalpine fir with aspen coming in second and minor components of Engelmann spruce and Douglas fir. Overstory composition contained approximately 58 percent spruce/fir and 41 percent aspen with less than 1 percent Douglas fir (rounding shows 0 (zero) percent.     Figure 7- Current conditions for the spruce/fir cover type on Monroe Mountain. The spruce/fir cover type occupies an elevational band between 9,400 and 10,800 feet on Monroe Mountain. Climatic factors generally define the distribution of the spruce/fir type. Spruce/fir are restricted to high elevations because of their low tolerance to high temperatures and deficient moisture at lower elevations (Alexander 1987). High elevations allow for cooler temperatures and more available moisture. Because they typically occupy higher elevations they are exposed to more wind. The Spruce/fir cover type at the lower end of the elevation band typically inhabits low areas, drainages and North facing slopes. These areas tend to contain or receive more moisture. Disturbances occurring within this type are windthrow, insect and disease, avalanches, and fire. The primary insects affecting this type are the spruce beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis) and Western spruce budworm (Choristoneura occidentalis). The primary disease affecting spruce/fir types are armillaria root rot. Windthrow is typically a precursor to spruce beetle outbreak. Average fire frequency in this type is between 50 and 80 years. Most stands on Monroe Mountain have this frequency because they contain some element of aspen. Those stands that have no aspen are more likely to have a fire frequency of 200 to 400 years (Hood and Miller 2007).  In recent years there has been an outbreak of spruce beetle on the North end of Monroe Mountain. The outbreak began in the early 2000s and has declined since 2012. New outbreaks within the project area are occurring around Koosharem Guard Station (near Indian Peaks) and appear to be heading south. There are also pockets of infestation near Barney Lake. The aerial insect and disease detection survey (2013) identified spruce beetle outbreaks near and around Barney Lake and Manning Meadows Reservoir (middle of project) and Monroe Peak, with the largest populations centered just East of Monroe Peak. Site visitation in June 2014 near Barney Lake and Manning Meadows Reservoir revealed an epidemic of spruce beetle larger than what was shown in 2013. How far this epidemic will progress is unknown at this time. What is known is that spruce beetle prefers larger mature spruce trees. Mortality of this size of spruce is common from an outbreak.  In addition to the spruce beetle epidemic, Western spruce budworm has also been identified on the 2013 survey. The budworm usually goes after both Engelmann and blue spruce but will also attack Douglas fir and subalpine fir. Western spruce budworm affects trees of all size and age classes. The budworm eats the needles and buds of the current year’s growth. They don’t usually kill the overstory trees; (although they can when other stressors such as drought are in play); however, they can be a precursor to the beetle (either spruce beetle or Douglas fir beetle). Western spruce bud worm in the overstory canopy usually affect volume growth and can inhibit cone production. Cone crops on Thousand Lake Mountain were affected by an outbreak in 2011 and 2012. Cone production resumed in 2013 but was sparse in comparison to pre-outbreak. In the understory, spruce budworm can be lethal to seedlings.  Disturbance by the spruce beetle and Western spruce budworm are currently affecting all size classes within most stands of the spruce/fir cover type. Current structure is and likely will continue to affect this cover type given these infestations. Current structure is classified as uneven-aged as indicated by the inverse J curve in Figure 8 (trees per acre over DBH).  2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 TPA 29 12 66 55 57 32 16 64 37 29 12 9 4 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 Trees per Acres Current Spruce-fir Cover Type Structure  Figure 8- Current structure for spruce/fir on Monroe Mountain.  Mixed Conifer  What does it mean to be classified as mixed conifer? That’s a question commonly asked. To find the explanation to that question the District Forester turned to Clinton’s (2009) Properly Functioning Condition (PFC) descriptions. In this document he describes mixed conifer types as, true firs as the climax vegetation but seral species are also represented. Unlike ponderosa pine and Douglas fir types, the mixed conifer type is usually not replaced by more shade tolerant species when natural disturbance patterns are maintained. Generally, a true fir species and two or more other conifer species are always evident in the stand, but vary in abundance. Aspen may also occur in the mixed conifer component. The understory is typically diverse consisting of grass, forbs, and shrubs. As canopy densities increase, understory species decline. See Figures 9 and 10 for current conditions of mixed conifer cover type on Monroe Mountain.   Figure 9- Examples of current mixed conifer type on Monroe Mountain. True firs are of the family Abies. They typically have erect cones primarily at the top of trees. The primary true firs on Monroe Mountain are subalpine fir and white fir. Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) is not considered a true fir. There are 5,210 acres of mixed conifer within the project area. Figure 7 shows the current conditions for this cover type on Monroe Mountain. Overall, the mixed conifer type is split 50/50 between conifers and aspen. Aspen comprises just over half of the understory and conifer dominates in the overstory with 62 percent of the cover (Figure 10).        4% 5% 50% 1% 40% Current Condition for Mixed Conifer Cover Type DF WF AS ES AF 3% 4% 51% 1% 41% Current Understory Composition of Mixed Conifer Cover Type DF WF AS ES AF 21% 4% 38% 7% 30% Current Overstory Composition of Mixed Conifer … DF WF AS ES AF    Figure 10- Current condition for mixed conifer cover type. Uneven-aged stand structures are typical for mixed conifer cover types (Clinton 2009). Figure 11 shows that this cover type is indeed uneven-aged.  2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 TPA 8939 967 485 254 131 127 53.6 32.9 17.6 2 6.3 6 0 0.2 1.6 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 Trees Per Acre Current Mixed Conifer Cover Type Structure  Figure 11- Depiction of structure for the Mixed Conifer Cover Type.  Mixed conifer stands share some of the same disturbances as the other cover types. Fire, insect and disease, and environmental factors such as frost, sun scald etc. Although shared, they have affected these types somewhat differently. Because mixed conifer stands are comprised of different species their percentage composition can also change. As an example, spruce and Douglas fir beetle tend to be host specific; therefore, mixed conifer stands that may have one or both of these species may be affected by these beetles changing composition from one that has a high percentage of these species to a stand that has more of those species unaffected by these beetles (e.g., subalpine fir). Conversely, mixed conifer stands can be more resilient to this type of disturbance because it maintains a mixed state while changing the percentages of conifer types over time.  Fire disturbances also have different effects on mixed conifer stands. Mixed conifer stands with a higher percentage of ponderosa pine and Douglas fir in the overstory tend to be more fire hardy than those with more of the true fires (subalpine fir and white fir). These species can remain more dominant given normal fire regimes because of their hardiness. Overstory aspen within mixed conifer are also more susceptible to fires because of the conifer component and thin bark. All understory species are susceptible to fire.  The diverse stand structure of pre-settlement mixed conifer forests contributed to a variety of understory conditions ranging from dry, open, grassy understories to moist, closed canopy understories with a diverse mixture of plant life forms (Hood and Miller 2007). Some of the mixed conifer stands in the project area look like those seen in Figure 9. The photo to the right shows areas of grasses whereas the photo to the left shows few trees in the understory. Lack of disturbance as described in the previous two paragraphs is the likely cause of understory diversity in some of these stands.  Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Seral 0.0% 17.9% 13.1% 4.6% 46.8% 14.7% 37.0% 81.8% 57.5% Stable 19.8% 24.2% 22.3% 5.9% 35.6% 23.2% 40.2% 63.4% 49.9% Aspen Cover Type 0.0% 24.2% 13.7% 4.6% 46.8% 15.2% 37.0% 81.8% 57.0% Mixed Conifer Cover Type 7.6% 17.3% 13.0% 4.9% 36.7% 19.7% 24.1% 52.4% 42.2% Spruce/Fir Cover Type 4.3% 20.3% 13.4% 6.8% 25.6% 15.8% 22.8% 62.7% 41.2% Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Seral 0.0% 31.5% 13.1% 0.0% 4.7% 1.2% 0.0% 4.1% 0.4% Stable 0.0% 11.0% 4.6% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% Aspen Cover Type 0.0% 31.5% 12.6% 0.0% 4.7% 1.1% 0.0% 4.1% 0.4% Mixed Conifer Cover Type 5.6% 43.0% 19.3% 1.5% 6.3% 4.3% 0.0% 4.5% 1.5% Spruce/Fir Cover Type 3.7% 31.2% 21.0% 0.0% 14.4% 6.2% 0.0% 12.8% 2.3% Current Condition VSS 5: Mature Forest (DBH: 18- 24") VSS 6: Old Forest (DBH: 24" +) VSS 3: Young Forest (DBH: 5- 12") VSS 1: Grass-Forb/Shrub (DBH: 0- 1") VSS 2: Seedling-Sapling (DBH: 1- 5") VSS 4: Mid-Aged Forest (DBH: 12- 18") Current Condition Vegetative Structural Stages Vegetative Structural Stage describes the conditions of forest structure based primarily on the needs of the Northern goshawk. For a landscape as a whole the tree structure is broken into six classes. They are VSS 1, VSS 2, VSS 3, VSS 4, VSS 5, and VSS 6, which correlate to DBH classes of 0 (zero) to1 inch, 1 to 5 inch, 5 to 12 inch, 12 to 18 inch, 18 to 24 inch and 24 inch plus, respectively for each class. Table 1 outlines the current conditions (as a percentage of stand density index (SDI)) as they relate to these classes.  Table 1- Current VSS conditions for the cover types.   Table 1 is a range of Stand Density Index (SDI) values by cover type for each VSS class. The VSS table in the appendix denotes SDI percentages by stand for each cover type. Ninety six percent of the stands in the aspen cover type are dominated by VSS 3, and 4 percent are dominated by VSS 2. The spruce/fir cover type has 82 percent of its stands dominated by VSS 3 with 18 percent dominated by VSS 4. Within the mixed conifer cover type 86 percent of the stands are dominated by VSS 3 and 14 percent by VSS 4.  Old Growth Old growth is analyzed by cover type as written by Hamilton (1983) in Characteristics of Old Growth in the Intermountain Region. In addition, the Intermountain Regional office issued a memo in 2007 to further clarify the measures needed to establish what the minimum old growth standard is. In this memo it is stated, “The minimum criteria to define old-growth forest in the Intermountain Region are: Diameter at Breast Height (DBH), Trees Per Acre (TPA), and Age (AGE).” Old growth is getting its own heading because the (LRMP states in the General Direction section on page IV-II, 1(c), “in a forested unit 5 percent or more should be in old growth”. A forested unit is being defined as the entire forested area within the project boundary. This includes all the cover types. Table 2 outlines what the current conditions are as it relates to old growth.  Points of clarification: In each cover type, Hamilton (1983) offers an area of application. He describes where these attributes need to be applied. Under the aspen cover type he explains that the old growth aspen definition applies to the stable and grazing disclimax stands. The seral stands may contain what may qualify as old growth, but its maintenance would require a treatment to remove the competing conifers. In Table 2 seral aspen stands are included within the calculations because the proposed action, in part, is removing conifers as a “maintenance action and to promote aspen regeneration”. Therefore, it is the professional opinion of the District Forester that the analysis meets the requirements as outlined by Hamilton.  Hamilton does not have a cover type listed as mixed conifer; therefore, the District Forester chose to use the Douglas fir cover type. It was chosen because Hamilton’s description of dry or colder, lower productivity sites fit with the composition of most of the mixed conifer stands in the project area. Hamilton’s best description is, “Douglas fir often the seral dominant as well as the climax dominant. Engelmann spruce or subalpine fir also are climax habitat types series”. Some of the surveyed stands contained white fir. Although Hamilton does not address those in his description, they are a common associate at lower, drier elevations. Table 2- Current percentage of forested acres of old growth in areas proposed for treatments. Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 13,314 37% Mixed Conifer 4,280 0 0% Spruce/fir 8,065 807 10% Forested Acres 48,330 14,121 29%  Most of the old growth currently exists within the aspen cover type followed by spruce/fir. Mixed conifer contains elements of old growth but didn’t fully meet the definition mainly because it did not have enough trees per acre greater than or equal to 15 inches diameter at breast height (dbh) and none of the mixed conifer stands had trees old enough to meet the greater than or equal to 200 years old.  There has been an outbreak of spruce beetles on Monroe Mountain. Little if any was picked up in the common stand exam in the form of measured dead trees. The outbreak consisted mainly in the Indian peaks area as of 2013. The outbreak has moved south and it has reached the Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake areas. Site visitations in 2014 revealed massive loss of overstory and likely mature trees. This epidemic will likely decrease the old growth within the spruce/fir cover type. In addition to the spruce beetle, a spruce budworm outbreak is occurring. Spruce budworm is a defoliator insect attacking the new needles. There preferred species is Douglas fir and subalpine fir. They will go after spruce but that is not the preferred. The spruce budworm does not usually kill the larger trees (although they can kill the smaller ones) but stresses them making them more susceptible to other things such as the Douglas fir beetle. Halloin (2003) confirms the last statement in his research stating, “Smaller trees tend to suffer more from the effects of defoliation, and larger trees tend to suffer more mortality from subsequent bark beetle attack.” Desired Condition See description in the EIS. Environmental Consequences Alternative 1 - No Action Direct Effects Aspen Cover Type Succession will continue causing further decline in the aspen cover type (particularly in seral stands) with likely conversions to spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types. With the decline in aspen cover, understory grass and forb production will also decline both in numbers and variety. Bartos (2007) adequately explains this in Aspen. He says, “When aspen lands convert to conifer dominated landscapes, substantially less water is available for streamflow, undergrowth biomass production is greatly reduced, and there is a marked decline in the diversity of plants and animals.” Stable stands have few, if any conifer, and without regeneration the multiple layers usually present within these stands will slowly decline with eventual die-off of the stand. At dieoff, most of the stands will likely revert to grasses and/or shrubs. Mixed Conifer and Spruce/fir Cover Types Mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types are being discussed and the effects of this alternative for the following reasons. The goal is to improve aspen, and one of the tools being considered is prescribed fire. Some areas being considered for prescribed fire border areas of these cover types. To be able to safely and effectively implement prescribed fire while minimizing impacts from prescribed fire to private property, the District is proposing mechanical treatments in these two cover types, especially adjacent to private property. Aspen also occurs in the mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types. Doing treatments within these two cover types is expected to benefit aspen. Fire Effects Increases in conifer cover may lead to increases in fire severity and size. In addition to their high moisture content and herbaceous understory, aspen stands act as fire breaks (Morelli 2009). Aspen stands often change fire behavior by halting its advance, knocking crown fires to the ground, or changing its direction. The further along in succession aspen stands progress, the amount and size of conifers increase thus increasing the probability of larger fires. Morelli (2009) and Bigler et al. (2005) point out aspen stands have been found to be 200 times less likely to burn than spruce/fir stands. Vegetative Structural Stages As time progresses, VSS percentages shift towards the larger VSS classes with excesses in VSS 2, 3, and 4 (Table 3). A more readily apparent shift into VSS 5 and 6 occur within all cover types. By year 100, mixed conifer is nearly in line with the desired followed closely by spruce/fir, and lastly aspen. In the aspen cover type, the likely driver of the push towards VSS 5 and 6 is the conifer component within the seral stands. The current age of aspen stands range from 45 to 178 years old with an average of 97 years old for the cover type. Aspen are not a long-lived species and it is likely that at year 50, some of the older aspen will begin to die off with even more occurring at year 100. To summarize the VSS, none of the cover types ever fully meets the desired condition. Some get close but it may take another 20 years for the mixed conifer and the spruce/fir to reach the desired condition. It is unlikely that aspen will ever fully reach the desired condition because they are short-lived. It is uncommon for the species to grow to the VSS 5 and 6 sizes in the quantities desired, and it is likely that conifers will take over as the dominant cover type because succession will continue to move forward under this alternative.  In addition, the current spruce beetle outbreak is likely to affect trees within VSS 4, 5, and 6 classes because the sizes related to those classes are preferred by the beetle. Vegetative Structural Stage 4, 5, and 6 may also be affected in Douglas fir if an outbreak of Douglas fir beetle were to occur. Table 3- VSS by cover type for Alternative 1. Alternative 1 VSS Class  1 2 3 4 5 6 Aspen Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 Current 13.60% 15.50% 56.78% 12.62% 1.11% 0.39% year 50 1.02% 32.32% 37.66% 23.60% 4.83% 0.58% year 100 2.12% 1.56% 33.51% 36.81% 21.17% 4.83% Mixed Conifer Current 12.97% 19.69% 42.24% 19.32% 4.25% 1.52% year 50 68.00% 33.56% 33.37% 23.41% 6.58% 2.40% year 100 19.00% 10.29% 42.91% 29.39% 12.89% 4.34% Spruce/fir Current 13.39% 15.85% 41.24% 21.00% 6.19% 2.34% year 50 6.40% 21.83% 29.84% 28.58% 9.54% 3.81% year 100 4.20% 15.76% 25.42% 32.56% 15.01% 7.07%  Old Growth This report has already covered the old growth as it relates to the current condition; it currently meets the desired condition (Table 4). The percentage of old growth increases with this alternative as time progress. As with the VSS, the old growth for the aspen cover type is somewhat misleading in some stands in year 50 and 100 because it is likely that some of those stands will convert to mixed conifer and/or spruce/fir or die because of old age. Some mixed conifer qualifies as old growth 100 years from now.  In addition, current spruce beetle outbreak is likely to affect trees the larger trees in the spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types because larger older trees are preferred by the beetle. Larger, older Douglas fir trees are susceptible to Douglas fir beetle and maybe affected if an outbreak of Douglas fir beetle were to occur.   Table 4- Old growth for Alternative 1. Current Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 13,314 37% Mixed Conifer 4,280 0 0% Spruce/fir 8,065 807 10% Forested Acres 48,330 14,121 29% Desired   5% Year 50- No Action Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 24,830 69% Mixed Conifer 4,280 0 0% Spruce/fir 8,065 2,984 37% Forested Acres 48,330 27,814 58% Desired   5% Year 100- No Action Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 32,746 91% Mixed Conifer 4,280 1,712 40% Spruce/fir 8,065 3,629 45% Forested Acres 48,330 38,088 79% Desired   5%  Indirect Effects Economics The implementation cost for this alternative is placed in the indirect effects section because when wildfires would occur cannot be predicted. Costs associated with this alternative are based off average wildfire costs on Monroe Mountain since 1990. Since 1990, the average cost to suppress wildfires on Monroe Mountain has been approximately $4,200 an acre. At $4,200 an acre, if 48,330 acres of aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir on Monroe Mountain were to burn from wildfire, the total cost would be approximately $178 million. A breakdown of this cost can be viewed in appendix B. Cumulative Effects With approximately 48,138 acres of aspen across in the project area, doing nothing may result in a large-scale conversion of this cover type to mixed conifer, spruce/fir, or sagebrush. How much or how long it takes is unknown because as the Utah Forest Restoration Working Group (2010) explains at the landscape scale, aspen declines are variable, depending on site characteristics, fire and succession, extreme climatic events, biotic agents, and human influence. Continued lack of action within the cover type may lead to long term aspen decline or loss. Bartos and Campbell (1998) describe that as, “Loss, or potential loss, of aspen on these lands can be attributed primarily to a combination of successional processes, reduction (or elimination) of fire, and longterm overuse by ungulates. Existing conditions indicate that most aspen stands will eventually be replaced by conifers, sagebrush, or possibly other shrub communities.” Alternative 2 Direct Effects Aspen Cover Type Mechanical option 1 is to remove all conifers. Treatment under option 1 within the aspen cover type would result in removal of conifer. The effects of this treatment would result in a more pure stand of aspen (at least for a time). In effect, this would create a two-aged stand of aspen (see Figure 11). The expected regeneration result would meet the minimum stocking rate of 300 suckers per acre as established in the LRMP on page IV-32 and the desired condition of 5,000 aspen suckers per acre. If overbrowsing of new aspen suckers occurs (browse thresholds are described in chapters 1 and 2 of the EIS) the District would implement a suite of response options (also described in chapters 1 and 2 of the EIS) to minimize impacts from overbrowsing of new aspen suckers. These thresholds and response options are expected to ensure minimum stocking rates and desired conditions for aspen regeneration are achieved.  Figure 12- Comparison of aspen between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Mechanical Treatment Option 1. Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifers 8 inches DBH and below within Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) and draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs). All conifers would be removed outside of the IRAs and draft UUAs.  The results from this treatment leave all the overstory trees. Removing the smaller trees will not likely have much of an impact (particularly in the long-term) on succession, although it would be better than alternative 1, as seen in Figure 12. Conifer encroachment has not been halted but has been reduced as compared to alternative 1. The conifers in the overstory are the ones that produce the seed to begin the next generation of conifers. It has often been thought that seral stands are nurseries for conifers. Conifers are more shade tolerant than aspen and are more adept at surviving under and overstory where light levels are less. Therefore, although this treatment may provide some regeneration of aspen, the effects would likely be short-lived and aspen survival rates would be low given the remaining overstory of conifer. Understory diversity would also be affected as Campbell (1995) describes, “As conifers gain dominance less light penetrates to the forest floor, and undergrowth shrubs and herbs decrease in both variety and abundance.” Both aspen regeneration and understory diversity would be better than alternative 1 but the effects would be short-lived.  Figure 13- Comparison of aspen between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Option 2. Mixed Conifer and Spruce/fir Cover Types Mechanical option 1 is to use group and single-tree selection to remove conifer to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre within all mechanical treatment areas.  Treatments under option 1 using group and singletree selection are designed to create or maintain an uneven-aged stand of trees. The goal of the 90 BA is to open the canopy and provide space for trees to grow and regenerate. Creating openings within the canopy would also break up the canopy fuels and minimize the potential of surface and/or crown fires. Opening the canopy is also expected to benefit the existing aspen that occurs in the mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types.  Table 5- Basal area (in square feet per acre) comparison between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Options 1 and 2. Basal Area Cover Type Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2 Mixed Conifer 123 91 76 Spruce/fir 144 88 109   Spruce beetles are at epidemic levels in some areas of the project. The less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre will also help minimize the impacts associated with this insect. To reach low hazard status, sites should be thinned to a basal area of less than or equal to 100 square feet per acre, average diameter should be reduced to less than 10 inches and spruce species composition to less than 50 percent (Costello and Howell 2006). Alternative 2, option 1 provides better resiliency than alternative 1 because spruce/fir stand basal area would be lower (see Table 5). Stand structure, in both cover types, (as an uneven-aged stand) for alternative 2, option 1 compared to alternative 1 is the same as described in the affected environment for both cover types (see Figure 14, 15, 16 and 17). Employing uneven-aged structure will help with resiliency to spruce beetle. Untreated stands on the Fishlake in the past have seen a total loss of all overstory trees (Cove area on Monroe Mountain, UM and Niotche in the seven Mile area). Some areas where treatments have occurred prior to infestation have lost some of the larger trees in the overstory but have structure remaining and replacement trees for the future.  -10 10 30 50 70 90 110 130 150 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 Trees per Acre DBH Mixed Conifer Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 2 Options 1 and 2  Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 14- Structural comparison for mixed conifer cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Options 1 and 2.   0 20 40 60 80 100 120 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 Trees per Acre DBH Spruce-fir Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 2 Options 1 and 2 Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 15- Structural comparison for spruce/fir cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Options 1 and 2. Spruce budworm has shown up on the aerial detection survey (2013) in various areas on Monroe Mountain. This pest is usually the precursor to the Douglas fir beetle. The Douglas fir beetle attacks the tree while it is stressed from the spruce budworm. In options 1 or 2, this could have an effect depending on when the treatment occurs and when the mortality happens. It is the professional opinion of the District Forester that it is likely to occur within the next 5 years regardless of treatment. It will have an effect on the older larger Douglas fir trees within the mixed conifer type and would affect the mature structural elements within this cover type. It will have some effect on old growth potential (in alternative 1 old growth for this cover type does not show until 100 years from now) by extending the time frame out even further (perhaps as long as 200 years). In areas where the stand(s) are heavily infested and/or already dead, sanitation and salvage will be employed to remove the trees. Removal of the infested trees will assist in removing some of the larvae resulting in a lower beetle population. Sanitation and salvage is an intermediate treatment designed to remove dead or dying trees. The LRMP outlines stocking levels after a final harvest. It is assumed that some areas impacted by the beetle may need planting because of known outbreaks on Monroe Mountain in conjunction with the knowledge gained from other outbreaks on the Forest. If this happens, it would be considered a final harvest and in need of restocking, as outlined on page IV-32 of the LRMP, if stocking is less than 150 to 200 seedlings per acre (minimums depend on site productivity).  Figure 16- Comparison of mixed conifer between Alternative 1 vs. Alternative 2 Option 1.   Figure 17- Comparison of spruce/fir between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Option 1.  Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifer 8 inches and below within IRAs and in draft UUAs. Outside of the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed using singletree and group selection to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre.  Treatments under this option remove all conifers less than or equal to 8 inches DBH. By removing the smaller trees, densities would be lowered short-term as compared to alternative 1; however, the larger overstory trees remain increasing the probability of spruce beetle infestation. Infestations occurring after treatment may lead to a loss of all spruce and conversion to a different cover type. If option 2 is chosen within spruce/fir cover type, the risk is high for total loss of the cover type given the current epidemic. If the larger overstory trees were lost to beetle infestation, no smaller understory trees (less than 8 inch DBH) would exist to eventually replace the larger dead trees. Trees would need to be replanted. It would take several years for newly planted trees to reach 8 inches DBH, and greater.  The elimination of the smaller trees will lower basal area in comparison to alternative 1 (Table 5); however, the effects will be short-lived because the cone bearing trees remain and they will immediately start re-establishing themselves.  Overall, cover type structure will change from an uneven-aged one to a more even aged structure as compared to alternative 1. Stands that are of this structure type are more susceptible to beetles and are less resilient to the effects of fire. Figures 14, 15, 18 and 19 illustrate the differences in option 2 to alternative 1.   Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 2 8,186 92 19,795 5,479 48,330 14,121 5,571 8,550 18% Old Growth Figure 18- Comparison of mixed conifer between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Option 2.   Figure 19- Comparison of Spruce/fir between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 Option 2. Old Growth Table 6 compares forested old growth between alternative 2, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1. Table 6- Old growth comparison between Alternative 1 and Alternative 2.   Alternative 2 shows an 11 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 2, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved. Fire Effects Burning will take place within all the cover types. As seral aspen stands are burned, existing aspen trees will die. Within the aspen cover type, following prescribed fire treatments, it is expected that several thousand aspen suckers per acre would regenerate. Previous fires on the Fishlake NF have resulted in thousands of aspen suckers per acre. The expected regeneration result would meet the minimum stocking rate of 300 suckers per acre as established in the LRMP on page IV-32 and the desired condition of 5,000 aspen suckers per acre. If overbrowsing of new aspen suckers occurs (browse thresholds are described in chapters 1 and 2 of the EIS) the District would implement a suite of response options (also described in chapters 1 and 2 of the EIS) to minimize impacts from overbrowsing of new aspen suckers. These thresholds and response options are expected to ensure minimum stocking rates and desired conditions for aspen are achieved.  Mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types may be severely damaged by a fire. With the exception of Douglas fir, most of the species associated with these cover types, are not fire hardy and are easily damaged or killed by fire (Hood and Miller 2007, and Evans 2011). Where fire occurs, almost all the understory will be burned (regardless of species). Most of the trees would be burned in the spruce/fir cover type. Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir and other subalpine vegetation evolved with limited adaptations to fire and few trees survive (Jenkins et al. 2014). Larger Douglas fir in the mixed conifer type would likely survive while most of the other species would be burned in the mixed conifer cover type. Jenkins et al. (2014) writes about a beetle out break on the Markagunt Plateau, Utah that killed 93 percent of the spruce overstory. They state that given the magnitude of overstory Engelmann spruce loss and the paucity of Engelmann spruce regeneration, 300 to 400 years may elapse before Engelmann spruce dominated forests are restored. Fires would have a more devastating effect than spruce beetle because more than just the spruce would be affected. Where fires affect the spruce/fir type there exist an increased potential for a cover type conversion from spruce/fir to grasses and shrubs lasting many years. There is also a potential for a type conversion from a mixed conifer to a Douglas fir type. Because of the removal of other conifer within the mixed conifer type by a fire, bare mineral soil would be exposed. This is an ideal site for seedling germination for the remaining Douglas fir. Mixed conifer stands containing aspen would see an increase in aspen suckering with scattered Douglas fir. To help minimize impacts to spruce/fir and mixed conifer from prescribed fire, as described in the EIS, within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. In addition, no fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands would be allowed. After prescribed fire treatments, if needed to meet LRMP standards, spruce/fir and mixed conifer would be replanted. Vegetative Structural Stage The structural characteristics for VSS are common for all alternatives; therefore, they are being addressed in the, “Effects Common to all Alternatives” section. The only distinguishing characteristic that is different is the number of acres affected within each alternative. Economics The cost to implement alternative 2, option 1 is approximately $7.1 million and the cost to implement alternative 2, option 2 is approximately $7.2 million. Compared to alternative 1 ($178 million) the cost to implement alternative 2, options 1 or 2 is considerably less than alternative 1. See appendix B for a breakdown of the costs. Indirect Effects A long-term concern for the aspen is the health of the aspen overstory. Walters et al. (1982) and Solarik et al. (2012) discuss results related to partial harvest of aspen. Waters et al focuses more on regeneration and concludes that more trees harvested and/or the lower the basal area after treatment the more sprouts there were. He also concludes that their minimum (6,000 sprouts per acre) was achieved on partial harvest but grazing impacts wiped them out on some of the plots within the study. Solarik et al talks some about regeneration but the primary focus is the overstory. In his research, he indicates that there is an increase in aspen mortality after harvest activities. Sunscald is a concern related to management alternatives where aspen overstory retention is the goal. Sunscald is thought to be a mortality factor; however, both research papers conclude that although sunscald was a factor and caused some mortality it was not the primary cause. Cankers and wind damage (or a combination of both) was the primary cause of death with sunscald being the entry point for the canker. Ironically, in Solarik et al., the more BA removed the higher the death rate of overstory aspen. Conversely, Waters et al., requires more BA removed to increase reproduction. Solarik et al points out that higher mortality rates occurred 5 years after treatment and increased higher still 10 years later. Since mechanical treatments in any alternative and options have aspen overstory retention within the aspen cover type it is likely that an unknown number of aspen overstory trees will die. Areas on Monroe Mountain where aspen was retained at low basal area are showing symptoms of sunscald and may be lost. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects area (CEA) is Monroe Mountain (see appendix A for a map of the CEA). Total CEA acres are 175,706 surrounding 11,805 acres of private property. Monroe Mountain lies near the center of the Fishlake National Forest. The southern part of Monroe Mountain falls outside the project boundary but is included as part of the cumulative affects area because there is likely to be activity that may affect this project. There are no known aspen related activities associated with Bureau of Land Management (BLM) lands that surround the mountain; therefore, that area was not considered for inclusion. Table 8 below outlines the cumulative effects for alternative 2. Harvest and prescribed burn are the past activities associated with alternative 2. Wildfire acres, although not a management activity, are included because they have had an effect on vegetation and have occurred throughout the CEA in the past. Past activities have affected 19 percent of the total acreage within the cumulative effects boundary. Alternative 2 will impact an additional 16 percent of the area. In addition, future activities scheduled for 2015 include 5,778 acres of prescribed fire. Activities past, present and future will affect 38 percent of the cumulative effects area (Table 7). Table 7- Alternative 2 cumulative effects. Alternative 2 Activity Past Activity Acres % of CEA Impacted (Acres) Alt 2 Acres % of CEA Impacted Foreseeable Future Acres Total Activity Acres % CEA Impacted Harvest 5,774 3% 8,186 5% 0 13,960 8% Prescribed Burn 13,998 8% 19,795 11% 5,778 39,571 23% Wildfire 12,894 7% 0 0% 0 12,894 7% Total 32,666 19% 27,981 16% 5,778 66,425 38%  Past activities come from every decade since the 1960s (Table 8). Past activities from 1960 to 1990 will have little cumulative bearing on cover type vegetation because those areas are largely recovered from past activities and are in various stages of development. Therefore the discussion will center on those activities from 2000 to the present. Past activities in the 2000 decade totals 4 percent with a 5 percent increase in the 2010 decade. Table 8- Past and foreseeable future activities by decade.  2000's 2010's Total- by Activity Harvest Acres 1,156 3,035 4,191 Prescribed Burn Acres 1,291 11,597 12,888 Wildfire Acres 4,192 1,520 5,712 Total 6,639 16,152 22,791 Percentage by Decade 4% 9% 13%  Aspen Cover Type Harvest and/or fire with past activities have removed most conifers within the type. Even-aged management has been the goal, removing all trees and regenerating aspen. Within this cover type, it has been largely successful, when fenced and protected from ungulate browsing. When considering the thresholds and response options, fire treatments for this alternative are expected to be successful in meeting LRMP standards and meeting the desired conditions for this project.  Option 1 mechanical treatments will result in two-aged stands with no conifer. Option 1 will also move the successional stage back and, for a time, create a pure stand of aspen. Option 2 treatments will not show a whole lot of change in reference to overstory composition and structure. Leaving the conifer in the overstory will result in succession progressing. Past treatments, particularly those from the 1990 to 2010 decades, in conjunction with option 1 mechanical treatments and prescribed fire, would decrease the number of mid to late-seral aspen acres because these stands would be in an earlier successional stage, the treatment would last longer across a larger area. Table 10 shows that the aspen cover type will have a 39 percent affect across the CEA. The past treatments in concert with the proposed treatments (regardless of option 1 or option 2 treatments) should provide a good mosaic of age classes and still maintain biological diversity. Mixed Conifer/Spruce/fir Past activities combined with proposed activities would have the following effects. Thin barked trees such as Engelmann spruce and sub-alpine are all less fire hardy and are killed more readily than Douglas fir (Hood and Miller 2007). This would tend to skew composition weighted more heavily to Douglas fir and white fir. Regardless of species, fire is lethal to the smaller trees. If there is a crown fire, all trees would likely die.  Option 1 combined with past activities would create a mosaic of stands with uneven-aged stands dominating from the mechanical treatment while the fire treatment areas would remove trees from all age classes and/or may eliminate some stands. Overall, cumulative effects would reflect a landscape with uneven-aged structure in a mosaic pattern. Fifty percent of mixed conifer acres and 30 percent of spruce/fir acres would be affected across the CEA (Table 9). Option 2 combined with past activities would result in stands with (at least temporarily) less smaller trees and changing the structure to one that is skewed to the larger classes.  Table 9- CEA affects by cover type.  Alternative 2 Current Acres of Cover Type in CEA Mechanical Treatment Option1 and 2 Prescribed Fire Treatment 60% Burned Total Acres affected in CEA Aspen 31,129 3146 15159 9095 12241 Percentage  10%  29% 39% Mixed Conifer 5,220 97 4183 2510 2607 Percentage  2%  48% 50% Spruce/fir 14,392 918 5658 3395 4313 Percentage  6%  24% 30%  Old Growth Old growth will decline by 11 percent via past and present actions and decline 1% additional through foreseeable future actions, totaling 12% for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 10). Table 10- CEA effects on old growth for Alternative 2. Cumulative Effects- Old Growth   Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 2  Acres of Old Growth Affected  Past, Present and Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48,330 14,121 0 0 0 0 29%         Alt 2 48,330 14,121 5,571 135 5,706 18% 17%  Alternative 3 Direct Effects Aspen Cover Type Mechanical option 1 is to remove all conifers. Treatment under option 1 within the aspen cover type will result in total removal of conifer. The effects of this treatment would result in a more pure stand of aspen (at least for a time). In effect, this would create a two-aged stand of aspen (see Figure 20). The expected regeneration result would meet the minimum stocking rate of 300 suckers per acre as established in the LRMP on page IV-32 and the desired condition of 5,000 aspen suckers per acre. It is believed minimum stocking levels will be achieved as outlined in the LRMP; however, grazing may affect the regeneration and cause the numbers to fall below LRMP standards. Stands of aspen will be monitored for this outcome and would be addressed through the browse thresholds and response options outlined in the EIS.  Figure 20- Comparison of aspen between alternative 1 and alternative 3 option 1. Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifers 8 inches diameter at breast height and below within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded and undeveloped areas. All conifers would be removed outside of these areas.  The results from this treatment leave all the overstory. Removing the smaller trees will not likely have much of an impact (particularly in the long term) on succession, although it would be better than alternative 1, as seen in Figure 21. Conifer encroachment has not been halted but has been reduced as compared to alternative 1. The conifers in the overstory are the ones that produce the seed to begin the next generation of conifers. It has often been thought that seral stands are nurseries for conifers. Conifers are more shade tolerant than aspen and are more adept at surviving under and overstory where light levels are less. So, although this treatment may provide some regeneration of aspen, the effects would likely be short-lived and survival rates would be low given the remaining overstory. Understory diversity would also be affected as Campbell (1995) describes, “As conifers gain dominance less light penetrates to the forest floor, and undergrowth shrubs and herbs decrease in both variety and abundance.” Both aspen regeneration and understory diversity would be better than alternative 1 but the effects would be short-lived.  Figure 21- Comparison of aspen between alternative 1 and alternative 3 option 2. Mixed Conifer and Spruce/fir Cover Types Mechanical option 1 is to use group and tree selection to remove conifer to a basal area (BA) of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre within all mechanical treatment areas.  Treatments under option 1 using group and single tree selection are designed to create or maintain and uneven-aged stand of trees. The goal of the 90 BA is to open the canopy and provide space for trees to grow and regenerate. Creating openings within the canopy would also break up the canopy fuels and minimize the potential of surface and/or crown fires.  Table 11- Basal area (in square feet per acre) comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 3 options 1and 2. Basal Area Cover Type Alt 1 Alt 3 Option 1 Alt 3 Option 2 Mixed Conifer 123 91 76 Spruce/fir 144 88 109   Spruce beetles are at epidemic levels in some areas of the project, the less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre will also help minimize the impacts associated with this insect. To reach low hazard status, sites should be thinned to a basal area of less than or equal to 100 square feet per acre, average diameter should be reduced to less than 10 inches and spruce species composition to less than 50 percent (Costello and Howell 2006). Alternative 3, option 1 provides better resiliency than alternative 1 because spruce/fir stand BA would be lower (see table 11). Stand structure, in both cover types, (as an uneven-aged stand) for alternative 3, option 1compared to alternative 1 is the same as described in the affected environment for both cover types (see Figures 22, 23, 24 and 25). Employing uneven- aged structure will also help with resiliency to spruce beetle and the irregular forest structure and compositions, both within and among stands, tend to produce wildfire resilient forests (Graham et al. 2009) more so than in alternative 1. Untreated stands on the Fishlake in the past have seen a total loss of all overstory trees (Cove area on Monroe Mountain, UM and Niotche in the seven Mile area). Some areas where treatments have occurred prior to infestation have lost some of the larger trees in the overstory but have structure remaining and replacement trees for the future.  0 25 50 75 100 125 150 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 Trees per Acre DBH Mixed Conifer Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 3 Options 1 and 2  Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 22- Structural comparison for mixed conifer cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 3 Options 1 and 2.   0 20 40 60 80 100 120 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 Trees per Acre DBH Spruce-fir Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 3 Options 1 and 2 Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 23- Structural comparison for spruce/fir cover type between alternative 1 and alternative 3 options 1 and 2. Spruce budworm has shown up on the aerial detection survey (2013). This pest is usually the precursor to the Douglas fir beetle. The Douglas fir beetle attacks the tree while it is stressed from the spruce budworm. In option 1 or 2 this could have an effect depending on when the treatment occurs and when the mortality happens. It is the District Forester’s professional opinion that it is likely to occur within the next 5 years regardless of treatment. It will have an effect on the older larger Douglas fir trees within the mixed conifer type and would affect the mature structural elements within the type. It will have some effect on old growth potential (in alternative 1 old growth for the type does not show until 100 years from now) by extending the time frame out even further (perhaps as long as 200 years). In areas where the stand(s) are heavily infested and/or already dead, sanitation and salvage will be employed to remove the trees. Removal of the infested trees will assist in removing some of the larvae resulting in a lower population. Sanitation and salvage is an intermediate treatment designed to remove dead or dying trees. The LRMP outlines stocking levels after a final harvest. It is assumed that some areas impacted by the beetle may need planting because of known outbreaks on Monroe Mountain in conjunction with the knowledge gained from other outbreaks on the Forest. If this happens, it would be considered a final harvest and in need of restocking, as outlined on page IV-32 of the LRMP, if stocking is less than 150 to 200 seedlings per acre (minimums depend on site productivity).  Figure 24- Comparison of mixed conifer between alternative 1 vs. alternative 3 option 1.   Figure 25- Comparison of spruce/fir between alternative 1 and alternative 3 option 1.  Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifer 8 inches and below within IRAs and draft UUAs. Outside of those areas will remove conifers using single tree and group selection to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre.  Treatments under this option remove all conifers less than or equal to 8 inches DBH. By removing the smaller trees, densities would be lowered short-term as compared to alternative 1; however, the larger overstory trees remain increasing the probability of spruce beetle infestation. Infestations occurring after treatment may lead to a loss of all spruce and conversion to a different cover type. If option 2 is chosen within spruce/fir cover type, the risk is high for total loss of the cover type given the current epidemic.  The elimination of the smaller trees will lower BA in comparison to alternative 1 (Table 11); however, the effects would be short-lived because the cone bearing trees remain and they will immediately start re-establishing themselves.  Overall cover type structure would change from an uneven-aged one to a more even-aged structure as compared to alternative 1. Stands that are of this structure type are more susceptible to beetles and are less resilient to the effects of fire. Figures 22, 23, 26 and 27 illustrate the differences in option 2 to alternative 1.   Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 3 13,648 236 18,814 5,223 48,330 14,121 5,459 8,662 18% Old Growth Figure 26- Comparison of mixed conifer between alternative 1 and alternative 3 option 2.  Figure 27- Comparison of Spruce/fir between alternative 1 and alternative 3 option 2. Old Growth Table 12 compares forested old growth between alternative 3, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1. Table 12- Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 3.   Alternative 3 shows an 11 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 3, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved. Fire Effects Burning will take place within all the cover types. The aspen cover type should see higher regeneration rate than the mechanically treated (option 1 and 2) areas. The proposed mechanical treatment of conifer removal within aspen stands will regenerate but past mechanical activities also removed the overstory aspen. The results of past mechanical activities, in terms of suckering and sapling response have been similar to the response to fire. With the proposed mechanical treatments, it is expected that the regeneration rate will meet the desired conditions but less than expected as compared to fire treatments due to limited aspen overstory removal. Previous fires on the Fishlake National Forest have generated thousands of suckers and saplings. One example is the Lost Lake fire of 2012; it generated 2,465 suckers and sapling per acre (Lost Lake fire monitoring report 2014).  Mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types may be severely damaged by a fire. With the exception of Douglas fir, most of the species associated with these cover types, are not fire hardy and are easily damaged or killed by fire (Hood and Miller 2007 and Evans 2011). Where fire occurs, almost all the understory would be burned (regardless of species). Most of the trees would be burned in the spruce/fir cover type. Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, and other subalpine vegetation evolved with limited adaptations to fire and few trees survive (Jenkins et al. 2014). Larger Douglas fir in the mixed conifer type would likely survive most of the other species would be burned in the mixed conifer cover type. Jenkins et al. (2014) writes about a beetle out break on the Markagunt Plateau, Utah that killed 93 percent of the spruce overstory. They state that given the magnitude of overstory Engelmann spruce loss and the paucity of Engelmann spruce regeneration, 300 to 400 years may elapse before Engelmann spruce dominated forests are restored. Fires would have a more devastating effect than spruce beetle because more than just the spruce would be affected. Where fires affect the spruce/fir type there exist an increased potential for a cover type conversion from spruce/fir to grasses and shrubs lasting many years. There is also a potential for a type conversion from a mixed conifer to a Douglas fir type. Because of the removal of other conifer within the mixed conifer type by a fire, bare mineral soil would be exposed. This is an ideal site for seedling germination for the remaining Douglas fir. Mixed conifer stands containing aspen would see an increase in suckering with scattered Douglas fir. To help minimize impacts to spruce/fir and mixed conifer from prescribed fire, as described in the EIS, within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. In addition, no fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands would be allowed. After prescribed fire treatments, if needed to meet LRMP standards, spruce/fir and mixed conifer would be replanted. Vegetative Structural Stage The structural characteristics for VSS are common for all alternatives; therefore, they are being addressed in the, “Effects Common to all Alternatives” section. The only distinguishing characteristic that is different is the number of acres affected within each alternative. Economics The cost to implement alternative 3, option 1 is approximately $8.2 million and the cost to implement alternative 3, option 2 is approximately $9.6 million. Compared to alternative 1 ($178 million) the cost to implement alternative 3, options 1 or 2 is considerably less than alternative 1. See appendix B for a breakdown of the costs. Indirect Effects A long-term concern for the aspen is the health of the aspen overstory. Walters et al. (1982) and Solarik et al. (2012) discuss results related to partial harvest of aspen. Waters et al. focuses more on regeneration and concludes that more trees harvested and/or the lower the BA after treatment the more sprouts there were. He also concludes that their minimum (6,000 sprouts per acre) was achieved on partial harvest but grazing impacts wiped them out on some of the plots within the study. Solarik et al talks some about regeneration but the primary focus is the overstory. In his research, he indicates that there is an increase in aspen mortality after harvest activities. Sunscald is a concern related to management alternatives where aspen overstory retention is the goal. Sunscald is thought to be a mortality factor; however, both research papers conclude that although sunscald was a factor and caused some mortality, it was not the primary cause. Cankers and wind damage (or a combination of both) was the primary cause of death with sunscald being the entry point for the canker. Ironically, in Solarik et al., the more BA removed the higher the death rate of overstory aspen. Conversely, Waters et al., requires more BA removed to increase reproduction. Solarik et al. points out that higher mortality rates occurred 5 years and increased higher yet 10 years later. Since mechanical treatments in any alternative and options have aspen overstory retention within the aspen cover type it is likely that an unknown number of aspen overstory trees will die. Areas on Monroe Mountain where aspen was retained at low basal area are showing symptoms of sunscald and may be lost. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects area (CEA) is Monroe Mountain (see appendix A for a map of the CEA). Total CEA acres are 175,706 surrounding 11,805 acres of private property. Monroe Mountain lies near the center of the Fishlake National Forest. The southern part of Monroe Mountain falls outside the project boundary but is included as part of the cumulative affects area because there is likely to be activity that may affect this project. There are no known activities associated with BLM lands that surround the mountain; therefore, that area was not considered for inclusion. Table 14 below outlines the cumulative effects for alternative 3. Harvest and prescribed burn are the past activities associated with alternative 3. Wildfire acres, although not a management activity, are included because they have had an effect on vegetation and have occurred throughout the CEA in the past. Past activities have affected 19 percent of the total acreage within the cumulative effects boundary. Alternative 3 will impact an additional 18 percent of the area. In addition, future activities scheduled for 2015 include 5,778 acres of prescribed fire. Activities past, present and future would impact 40 percent of the cumulative effects area (Table 13). Table 13- Alternative 3 cumulative effects. Alternative 3 Activity Past Activity Acres % of Past CEA Impacted (Acres) Alt 3 Acres % of CEA Impacted Foreseeable Future Acres Total Activity Acres % CEA Impacted Harvest 5,774 3% 13,648 8% 0 19,422 11% Prescribed Burn 13,998 8% 18,814 11% 5,778 38,590 22% Wildfire 12,894 7% 0 0% 0 12,894 7% Total 32,666 19% 32,462 18% 5,778 70,906 40%  Past activities come from every decade since the 1960s. Past activities from 1960 to 1990 would have little cumulative bearing on cover type vegetation because those areas are largely recovered from past activities and are in various stages of development. Therefore the discussion will center on those activities from 2000 to the present. Past activities in the 2000 decade totals 4 percent with a 5 percent increase in the 2010 decade Table 14.   Table 14- Past and foreseeable future activities by decade.  2000's 2010's Total- by Activity Harvest Acres 1,156 3,035 4,191 Prescribed Burn Acres 1,291 11,597 12,888 Wildfire Acres 4,192 1,520 5,712 Total 6,639 16,152 22,791 Percentage by Decade 4% 9% 13%  Aspen Cover Type Harvest and/or fire within past activities have removed most conifers within the type. Even-aged management has been the goal, removing all trees and regenerating aspen. Within the type, it has been largely successful. To that end, fire treatments for this alternative should be as successful as in the past. Option 1 mechanical treatments will result in two-aged stands with no conifer.  Option 1 will also move the successional stage back and, for a time, create a pure stand of aspen. Option 2 treatments will not show a whole lot of change in reference to overstory composition and structure. Leaving the conifer in the overstory will result in succession progressing. Past treatments, particularly those from the 1990 to 2010 decades, in conjunction with option 1 mechanical treatments and prescribed fire, would decrease the number of mid to late-seral aspen acres because these stands would be in an earlier successional stage, the treatment would last longer across a larger area. Table 16 shows that the aspen cover type will have a 48 percent affect across the CEA. The past treatments in concert with the proposed treatments (regardless of option 1 or option 2 treatments) should provide a good mosaic of age classes and still maintain biological diversity. Mixed Conifer/Spruce/fir Past activities combined with proposed activities would have the following effects. Thin barked trees such as Engelmann spruce and sub-alpine are all less fire hardy and are killed more readily than Douglas fir (Hood and Miller 2007). This would tend to skew composition weighted more heavily to Douglas fir and white fir. Regardless of species, fire is lethal to the smaller trees. If there is a crown fire, all trees would likely die.  Option 1 combined with past activities would create a mosaic of stands with uneven-aged stands dominating from the mechanical treatment while the fire treatment areas would remove trees from all age classes and/or may eliminate some stands. Over all cumulative effects would reflect a landscape with uneven-aged structure in a mosaic pattern. Fifty percent of mixed conifer acres and 37 percent of spruce/fir acres would be affected across the CEA (table 15). Option 2 combined with past activities would stands with (at least temporarily) less smaller trees and changing the structure one that is skewed to the larger classes.   Table 15- CEA affects by cover type.  Alternative 3 Current Acres of Cover Type in CEA Mechanical Treatment Option1 and 2 Prescribed Fire Treatment 60% Burned Total Acres affected in CEA Aspen 31129 6422 14318 8591 15013 Percentage  21%  28% 48% Mixed Conifer 5220 91 4190 2514 2605 Percentage  2%  48% 50% Spruce/fir 14392 2355 4988 2993 5348 Percentage  16%  21% 37% Old Growth Old growth will decline by 11 percent via past and present actions and decline an additional 1% through foreseeable future actions, totaling 12% for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 16). Table 16- CEA effects on old growth for Alternative 3. Cumulative Effects- Old Growth   Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 3  Acres of Old Growth Affected  Past, Present and Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48,330 14,121 0 0 0 0 29%         Alt 3 48,330 14,121 5,459 228 5,687 18% 17%  Alternative 4 Direct Effects Aspen Cover Type Mechanical option 1 is to remove all conifers. Treatment under option 1 within the aspen cover type would result in total removal of conifer. The effects of this treatment would result in a more pure stand of aspen (at least for a time). In effect, this would create a two-aged stand of aspen (see Figure 28). The expected regeneration result would meet the minimum stocking rate of 300 suckers per acre as established in the LRMP on page IV-32 and the desired condition of 5,000 aspen suckers per acre. It is believed minimum stocking levels would be achieved as outlined in the LRMP; however, grazing may impact the regeneration and cause the numbers to fall below LRMP standards. Stands of aspen will be monitored for this outcome and will be addressed through the browse thresholds and response options outlined in the EIS.  Figure 28- Comparison of aspen between Alternative 1 and Alternative 4 Option1. Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifers 8 inches diameter at breast height and below within IRAs and draft UUAs. All conifers will be removed outside of these areas.  The results from this treatment leave all the overstory. Removing the smaller trees would not likely have much of an impact (particularly in the long-term) on succession, although it would be better than alternative 1, as seen in Figure 29. Conifer encroachment has not been halted but has been reduced as compared to alternative 1. The conifers in the overstory are the ones that produce the seed to begin the next generation of conifers. It has often been thought that seral stands are nurseries for conifers. Conifers are more shade tolerant than aspen and are more adept at surviving under and overstory where light levels are less. Therefore, although this treatment may provide some regeneration of aspen, the effects would likely be short-lived and survival rates would be low given the remaining overstory. Understory diversity would also be affected as Campbell (1995) describes, “As conifers gain dominance less light penetrates to the forest floor, and undergrowth shrubs and herbs decrease in both variety and abundance.” Both aspen regeneration and understory diversity would be better than alternative 1 but the effects would be short-lived.  Figure 29- Comparison of aspen between Alternative 1 and Alternative 4 Option 2. Mixed Conifer and Spruce/fir Cover Types Mechanical option 1 is to use group and singletree selection to remove conifer to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre within all mechanical treatment areas.  Treatments under option 1 using group and single tree selection are designed to create or maintain and uneven-aged stand of trees. The goal of the 90 BA is to open the canopy and provide space for trees to grow and regenerate. Creating openings within the canopy would also break up the canopy fuels and minimize the potential of surface and/or crown fires. Table 17- Basal area (in square feet per acre) comparison between Alternative 1 and Alternative 4 Options 1and 2. Basal Area Cover Type Alt 1 Alt 4 Option 1 Alt 4 Option 2 Mixed Conifer 123 91 76 Spruce/fir 144 88 109   Spruce beetles are at epidemic levels in some areas of the project, the less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre will also help minimize the impacts associated with this insect. To reach low hazard status, sites should be thinned to a BA of less than or equal to 100 square feet per acre, average diameter should be reduced to less than 10 inches and spruce species composition to less than 50 percent (Costello and Howell 2006). Alternative 4, option 1 provides better resiliency than alternative 1 because spruce/fir stand BA would be lower (see Table 17). Stand structure, in both cover types, (as an uneven-aged stand) for alternative 4, option 1 compared to alternative 1 is the same as described in the affected environment for both cover types (see Figures 30, 31, 32 and 33). Employing uneven-aged structure would also help with resiliency to spruce beetle and the irregular forest structure and compositions, both within and among stands, tend to produce wildfire resilient forests (Graham et al. 2009) more so than in alternative 1. Untreated stands on the Fishlake in the past have seen a total loss of all overstory trees (Cove area on Monroe Mountain, UM and Niotche in the seven Mile area). Some areas where treatments have occurred prior to infestation have lost some of the larger trees in the overstory but have structure remaining and replacement trees for the future.   0 25 50 75 100 125 150 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 Trees per Acre DBH Mixed Conifer Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 4 Options 1 and 2  Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 30- Structural comparison for mixed conifer cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 4 Options 1 and 2.   0 20 40 60 80 100 120 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 Trees per Acre DBH Spruce-fir Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 4 Options 1 and 2 Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 31- Structural comparison for spruce/fir cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 4 Options 1 and 2. Spruce budworm has shown up on the aerial detection survey (2013). This pest is usually the precursor to the Douglas fir beetle. The Douglas fir beetle attacks the tree while it is stressed from the spruce budworm. In option 1 or 2 this could have an effect depending on when the treatment occurs and when the mortality happens. It is the District Forester’s professional opinion that it is likely to occur within the next 5 years regardless of treatment. It will have an effect on the older larger Douglas fir trees within the mixed conifer type and would affect the mature structural elements within the type. It would have some effect on old growth potential (in alternative 1 old growth for the type does not show until 100 years from now) by extending the time frame out even further (perhaps as long as 200 years). In areas where the stand(s) are heavily infested and/or already dead, sanitation and salvage will be employed to remove trees. Removal of the infested will assist in removing some of the larvae resulting in a lower population. Sanitation and salvage is an intermediate treatment designed to remove dead or dying trees. The LRMP outlines stocking levels after a final harvest. It is assumed that some areas impacted by the beetle may need planting because of known outbreaks on Monroe Mountain in conjunction with the knowledge gained from other outbreaks on the Forest. If this happens, it would be considered a final harvest and in need of restocking, as outlined on page IV-32 of the LRMP, if stocking is less than 150 to 200 seedlings per acre (minimums depend on site productivity).  Figure 32- Comparison of mixed conifer between alternative 1 vs. alternative 4 option 1.  Figure 33- Comparison of spruce/fir between Alternative 1 and Alternative 4 Option 1.  Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifer 8 inches and below within IRAs and draft UUAs. Outside of those areas will remove conifers using singletree and group selection to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre.  Treatments under this option remove all conifers less than or equal to 8 inches DBH. By removing the smaller trees, densities would be lowered short-term as compared to alternative 1; however, the larger overstory trees remain increasing the probability of spruce beetle infestation. Infestations occurring after treatment may lead to a loss of all spruce and conversion to a different cover type. If option 2 is chosen within spruce/fir cover type, the risk is high for total loss of the cover type given the current epidemic.  The elimination of the smaller trees will lower BA in comparison to alternative 1 (Table 17); however, the effects will be short-lived because the cone bearing trees remain and they would immediately start re-establishing themselves.  Over all, cover type structure will change from an uneven-aged one to a more even-aged structure as compared to alternative 1. Stands that are of this structure type are more susceptible to beetles and are less resilient to the effects of fire. Figures 30, 31, 34 and 35 illustrate the differences in option 2 to alternative 1.   Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 4 19,837 411 16,462 4,547 48,330 14,121 4,958 9,163 19% Old Growth Figure 34- Comparison of mixed conifer between alternative 1 and alternative 4 option 2.  Figure 35- Comparison of Spruce/fir between alternative 1 and alternative 4 option 2. Old Growth Table 18 compares forested old growth between alternative 4, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1. Table 18- Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 4.   Alternative 4 shows a 10 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 4, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved. Fire Effects Burning will take place within all the cover types. The aspen cover type should see a higher regeneration rate than the mechanically treated (option 1 and 2) areas. The proposed mechanical treatment of conifer removal within aspen stands will regenerate but past mechanical activities also removed the overstory aspen. The results of past mechanical activities, in terms of suckering and sapling response have been similar to the response to fire. With the proposed mechanical treatments, it is expected that the regeneration rate would meet the desired but less than expected as compared to fire treatments due to limited aspen overstory removal. Previous fires on the Fishlake NF have generated thousands of suckers and saplings. One example is the Lost Lake fire of 2012; it generated 2,465 suckers and sapling per acre (Lost Lake fire monitoring report 2014).  Mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types may be severely damaged by a fire. With the exception of Douglas fir, most of the species associated with these cover types, are not fire hardy and are easily damaged or killed by fire (Hood and Miller 2007 and Evans 2011). Where fire occurs, almost all the understory will be burned (regardless of species). Most of the trees would be burned in the spruce/fir cover type. Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, and other subalpine vegetation evolved with limited adaptations to fire and few trees survive (Jenkins et al. 2014). Larger Douglas fir in the mixed conifer type would likely survive most of the other species would be burned in the mixed conifer cover type. Jenkins et al (2014) writes about a beetle out break on the Markagunt Plateau, Utah that killed 93 percent of the spruce overstory. They state that given the magnitude of overstory Engelmann spruce loss and the paucity of Engelmann spruce regeneration, 300 to 400 years may elapse before Engelmann spruce dominated forests are restored. Fires would have a more devastating effect than spruce beetle because more than just the spruce would be affected. Where fires affect the spruce/fir type there exist an increased potential for a cover type conversion from spruce/fir to grasses and shrubs lasting many years. There is also a potential for a type conversion from a mixed conifer to a Douglas fir type. Because of the removal of other conifer within the mixed conifer type by a fire, bare mineral soil would be exposed. This is an ideal site for seedling germination for the remaining Douglas fir. Mixed conifer stands containing aspen would see an increase in suckering with scattered Douglas fir. To help minimize impacts to spruce/fir and mixed conifer from prescribed fire, as described in the EIS, within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. In addition, no fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands would be allowed. After prescribed fire treatments, if needed to meet LRMP standards, spruce/fir and mixed conifer would be replanted. Vegetative Structural Stage The structural characteristics for VSS are common for all alternatives; therefore, they are being addressed in the, “Effects Common to all Alternatives” section. The only distinguishing characteristic that is different is the number of acres affected within each alternative. Economics The cost to implement alternative 4, option 1 is approximately $8.7 million and the cost to implement alternative 4, option 2 is approximately $9.2 million. Compared to alternative 1 ($178 million) the cost to implement alternative 4, options 1 or 2 is considerably less than alternative 1. See appendix B for a breakdown of the costs. Indirect Effects A long-term concern for the aspen is the health of the aspen overstory. Walters et al. (1982) and Solarik et al. (2012) discuss results related to partial harvest of aspen. Waters et al focuses more on regeneration and concludes that more trees harvested and/or the lower the BA after treatment the more sprouts there were. He also concludes that their minimum (6,000 sprouts per acre) was achieved on partial harvest but grazing impacts wiped them out on some of the plots within the study. Solarik et al. talks some about regeneration but the primary focus is the overstory. In his research, he indicates that there is an increase in aspen mortality after harvest activities. Sunscald is a concern related to management alternatives where aspen overstory retention is the goal. Sunscald is thought to be a mortality factor; however, both research papers conclude that although sunscald was a factor and caused some mortality it was not the primary cause. Cankers and wind damage (or a combination of both) was the primary cause of death with sunscald being the entry point for the canker. Ironically, in Solarik et al., the more BA removed the higher the death rate of overstory aspen. Conversely, Waters et al., requires more BA removed to increase reproduction. Solarik et al. points out that higher mortality rates occurred 5 years and increased higher yet 10 years later. Since mechanical treatments in any alternative and options have aspen overstory retention within the aspen cover type it is likely that an unknown number of aspen overstory trees will die. Areas on Monroe Mountain where aspen was retained at low basal area are showing symptoms of sunscald and may be lost. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects area (CEA) is Monroe Mountain (see appendix A for a map of the CEA). Total CEA acres are 175,706 surrounding 11,805 acres of private property. Monroe Mountain lies near the center of the Fishlake National Forest. The southern part of Monroe Mountain falls outside the project boundary but is included as part of the cumulative affects area because there is likely to be activity that may affect this project. There are no known activities associated with BLM lands that surround the mountain; therefore, that area was not considered for inclusion. Table 20 below outlines the cumulative effects for alternative 4. Harvest and prescribed burn are the past activities associated with alternative 4. Wildfire acres, although not a management activity, are included because they have had an effect on vegetation and have occurred throughout the CEA in the past. Past activities have affected 19 percent of the total acreage within the cumulative effects boundary. Alternative 4 would impact an additional 21 percent of the area. In addition, future activities scheduled for 2015 include 5,778 acres of prescribed fire. Activities past, present, and future would affect 43 percent of the cumulative effects area (Table 19). Table 19- Alternative 4 cumulative effects. Alternative 4 Activity Past Activity Acres % of Past CEA Impacted (Acres) Alt 4 Acres % of CEA Impacted Foreseeable Future Acres Total Activity Acres % CEA Impacted Harvest 5,774 3% 19,837 11% 0 25,611 15% Prescribed Burn 13,998 8% 16,462 9% 5,778 36,238 21% Wildfire 12,894 7% 0 0% 0 12,894 7% Total 32,666 19% 36,299 21% 5,778 74,743 43%  Past activities come from every decade since the 1960s. Past activities from 1960 to 1990 would have little cumulative bearing on cover type vegetation because those areas are largely recovered from past activities and are in various stages of development. Therefore the discussion will center on those activities from 2000 to the present. Past activities in the 2000 decade totals 4 percent with a 5 percent increase in the 2010 decade (Table 20).   Table 20- Past and foreseeable future activities by decade.  2000's 2010's Total- by Activity Harvest Acres 1,156 3,035 4,191 Prescribed Burn Acres 1,291 11,597 12,888 Wildfire Acres 4,192 1,520 5,712 Total 6,639 16,152 22,791 Percentage by Decade 4% 9% 13%  Aspen Cover Type Harvest and/or fire within past activities have removed most conifers within the type. Even-aged management has been the goal, removing all trees and regenerating aspen. Within the type, it has been largely successful. To that end, fire treatments for this alternative should be as successful as in the past. Option 1 mechanical treatments will result in two-aged stands with no conifer. Option 1 will also move the successional stage back and, for a time, create a pure stand of aspen. Option 2 treatments will not show a whole lot of change in reference to overstory composition and structure. Leaving the conifer in the overstory will result in succession progressing. Past treatments, particularly those from the 1990 to 2010 decades, in conjunction with option 1 mechanical treatments and prescribed fire, would decrease the number of mid to late-seral aspen acres because these stands would be in an earlier successional stage, the treatment would last longer across a larger area. Table 21 shows that the aspen cover type will have a 55 percent affect across the CEA. The past treatments in concert with the proposed treatments (regardless of option 1 or option 2 treatments) should provide a good mosaic of age classes and still maintain biological diversity. Mixed Conifer/Spruce/fir Past activities combined with proposed activities would have the following effects. Thin barked trees such as Engelmann spruce and sub-alpine are all less fire hardy and are killed more readily than Douglas fir (Hood and Miller 2007). This would tend to skew composition weighted more heavily to Douglas fir and white fir. Regardless of species, fire is lethal to the smaller trees. If there is a crown fire, all trees would likely die.  Option 1 combined with past activities would create a mosaic of stands with uneven-aged stands dominating from the mechanical treatment while the fire treatment areas would remove trees from all age classes and/or may eliminate some stands. Over all cumulative effects would reflect a landscape with uneven-aged structure in a mosaic pattern. Fifty percent of mixed conifer acres and 44 percent of spruce/fir acres would be affected across the CEA (Table 21). Option 2 combined with past activities would stands with (at least temporarily) less smaller trees and changing the structure one that is skewed to the larger classes.    Table 21- CEA affects by cover type.  Alternative 4 Current Acres of Cover Type in CEA Mechanical Treatment Option1 and 2 Prescribed Fire Treatment 60% Burned Total Acres affected in CEA Aspen 31129 9492 12763 7658 17150 Percentage  30%  25% 55% Mixed Conifer 5220 102 4178 2507 2609 Percentage  2%  48% 50% Spruce/fir 14392 4113 3802 2281 6394 Percentage  29%  16% 44% Old Growth Old growth will decline by 10 percent via past and present actions and decline an additional 1% through foreseeable future actions, totaling 11% for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 22). Table 22- CEA effects on old growth for Alternative 4. Cumulative Effects- Old Growth   Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 4  Acres of Old Growth Affected  Past, Present and Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48330 14121 0 0 0 0 29%         Alt 4 48,330 14,121 4,958 228 5,186 19% 18% Alternative 5 Direct Effects Aspen Cover Type Mechanical option 1 is to remove all conifers. Treatment under option 1 within the aspen cover type would result in total removal of conifer. The effects of this treatment would result in a more pure stand of aspen (at least for a time). In effect, this would create a two-aged stand of aspen (see Figure 36). The expected regeneration result would meet the minimum stocking rate of 300 suckers per acre as established in the LRMP on page IV-32 and the desired condition of 5,000 aspen suckers per acre. It is believed minimum stocking levels would be achieved as outlined in the LRMP; however, grazing may affect the regeneration and cause the numbers to fall below LRMP standards. Stands of aspen will be monitored for this outcome and would be addressed through the browse thresholds and response options outlined in the EIS.  Figure 36- Comparison of aspen between alternative 1 and alternative 5 option1. Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifers 8 inches DBH and below within IRAs and draft UUAs. All conifers would be removed outside of these areas.  The results from this treatment leave all the overstory. Removing the smaller trees would not likely have much of an impact (particularly in the long-term) on succession, although it would be better than alternative 1, as seen in Figure 37. Conifer encroachment has not been halted but has been reduced as compared to alternative 1. The conifers in the overstory are the ones that produce the seed to begin the next generation of conifers. It has often been thought that seral stands are nurseries for conifers. Conifers are more shade tolerant than aspen and are more adept at surviving under and overstory where light levels are less. Therefore, although this treatment may provide some regeneration of aspen, the effects would likely be short-lived and survival rates would be low given the remaining overstory. Understory diversity would also be affected as Campbell (1995) describes, “As conifers gain dominance less light penetrates to the forest floor, and undergrowth shrubs and herbs decrease in both variety and abundance.” Both aspen regeneration and understory diversity would be better than alternative 1 but the effects would be short-lived.  Figure 37- Comparison of aspen between alternative 1 and alternative 5 option 2. Mixed Conifer and Spruce/fir Cover Types Mechanical option 1 is to use group and singletree selection to remove conifer to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre within all mechanical treatment areas.  Treatments under option 1 using group and singletree selection are designed to create or maintain and uneven-aged stand of trees. The goal of the 90 BA is to open the canopy and provide space for trees to grow and regenerate. Creating openings within the canopy would also break up the canopy fuels and minimize the potential of surface and/or crown fires. Table 23- Basal area (in square feet per acre) comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 5 options 1and 2. Basal Area Cover Type Alt 1 Alt 5 Option 1 Alt 5 Option 2 Mixed Conifer 123 91 76 Spruce/fir 144 88 109   Spruce beetles are at epidemic levels in some areas of the project, the less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre will also help minimize the impacts associated with this insect. To reach low hazard status, sites should be thinned to a basal area of less than or equal to 100 square feet per acre, average diameter should be reduced to less than 10 inches and spruce species composition to less than 50 percent (Costello and Howell 2006). Alternative 5, option 1 provides better resiliency than alternative 1 because spruce/fir stand BA would be lower (see Table 23). Stand structure, in both cover types, (as an uneven-aged stand) for alternative 5, option 1compared to alternative 1 is the same as described in the affected environment for both cover types (see Figures 38, 39, 40 and 41). Employing uneven-aged structure will also help with resiliency to spruce beetle and the irregular forest structure and compositions, both within and among stands, tend to produce wildfire resilient forests (Graham et al. 2009) more so than in alternative 1. Untreated stands on the Fishlake in the past have seen a total loss of all overstory trees (Cove area on Monroe Mountain, UM and Niotche in the seven Mile area). Some areas where treatments have occurred prior to infestation have lost some of the larger trees in the overstory but have structure remaining and replacement trees for the future.   0 25 50 75 100 125 150 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 Trees per Acre DBH Mixed Conifer Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 5 Options 1 and 2  Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 38- Structural comparison for mixed conifer cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 5 Options 1 and 2.   0 20 40 60 80 100 120 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 Trees per Acre DBH Spruce-fir Structural Comparison Between Alt. 1 and Alt. 5 Options 1 and 2 Alt 1 Alt 2 Option 1 Alt 2 Option 2  Figure 39- Structural comparison for spruce/fir cover type between Alternative 1 and Alternative 5 Options 1 and 2. Spruce budworm has shown up on the aerial detection survey (2013). This pest is usually the precursor to the Douglas fir beetle. The Douglas fir beetle attacks the tree while it is stressed from the spruce budworm. In option 1 or 2 this could have an effect depending on when the treatment occurs and when the mortality happens. It is the District Forester’s professional opinion that it is likely to occur within the next 5 years regardless of treatment. It will have an effect on the older larger Douglas fir trees within the mixed conifer type and would affect the mature structural elements within the type. It would have some effect on old growth potential (in alternative 1 old growth for the type does not show until 100 years from now) by extending the time frame out even further (perhaps as long as 200 years). In areas where the stand(s) are heavily infested and/or already dead, sanitation and salvage will be employed to remove trees. Removal of the infested trees will assist in removing some of the larvae resulting in a lower population. Sanitation and salvage is an intermediate treatment designed to remove dead or dying trees. The LRMP outlines stocking levels after a final harvest. It is assumed that some areas impacted by the beetle may need planting because of known outbreaks on Monroe Mountain in conjunction with the knowledge gained from other outbreaks on the Forest. If this happens, it would be considered a final harvest and in need of restocking, as outlined on page IV-32 of the LRMP, if stocking is less than 150 to 200 seedlings per acre (minimums depend on site productivity).  Figure 40- Comparison of mixed conifer between alternative 1 vs. alternative 5 option 1.  Figure 41- Comparison of spruce/fir between alternative 1 and alternative 5 option 1.  Mechanical option 2 is to remove all conifer 8 inches DBH and below within IRAs and draft UUAs. Outside of those areas will remove conifers using singletree and group selection to a BA of less than or equal to 90 square feet per acre.  Treatments under this option remove all conifers less than or equal to 8 inches BH. By removing the smaller trees, densities would be lowered short-term as compared to alternative 1; however, the larger overs-tory trees remain increasing the probability of spruce beetle infestation. Infestations occurring after treatment may lead to a loss of all spruce and conversion to a different cover type. If option 2 is chosen within spruce/fir cover type, the risk is high for total loss of the cover type given the current epidemic.  The elimination of the smaller trees will lower BA in comparison to alternative 1 (Table 23); however, the effects will be short-lived because the cone bearing trees remain and they will immediately start re-establishing themselves.  Overall, cover type structure will change from an uneven-aged one to a more even-aged structure as compared to alternative 1. Stands that are of this structure type are more susceptible to beetles and are less resilient to the effects of fire. Figures 38, 39, 42 and 43 illustrate the differences in option 2 to alternative 1.   Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 5 15,072 291 15,872 4,325 48,330 14,121 4,616 9,505 20% Old Growth Figure 42- Comparison of mixed conifer between alternative 1 and alternative 5 option 2.  Figure 43- Comparison of Spruce/fir between alternative 1 and alternative 5 option 2. Old Growth Table 24 compares forested old growth between alternative 5, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1. Table 24- Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 5.   Alternative 5 shows a 9 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 5, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved. Fire Effects Burning will take place within all the cover types. The aspen cover type should see a higher regeneration rate than the mechanically treated (option 1 and 2) areas. The proposed mechanical treatment of conifer removal within aspen stands will regenerate but past mechanical activities also removed the overstory aspen. The results of past activities, in terms of suckering and sapling response have been similar to the response to fire. With the proposed mechanical treatments it is expected that the regeneration rate will meet the desired but less than expected as compared to fire treatments due to limited aspen overstory removal. Previous fires on the Fishlake National Forest have generated thousands of suckers/saplings. One example is the Lost Lake fire of 2012; it generated 2,465 suckers and sapling per acre (Lost Lake fire monitoring report 2014).  Mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types may be severely damaged by a fire. With the exception of Douglas fir, most of the species associated with these cover types, are not fire hardy and are easily damaged or killed by fire (Hood and Miller 2007 and Evans 2011). Where fire occurs, almost all the understory will be burned (regardless of species). Most of the trees would be burned in the spruce/fir cover type. Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, and other subalpine vegetation evolved with limited adaptations to fire and few trees survive (Jenkins et al. 2014). Larger Douglas fir in the mixed conifer type would likely survive while most of the other species would be burned in the mixed conifer cover type. Jenkins et al. 2014 writes about a beetle out break on the Markagunt Plateau, Utah that killed 93 percent of the spruce overstory. They state that given the magnitude of overstory Engelmann spruce loss and the paucity of Engelmann spruce regeneration, 300 to 400 years may elapse before Engelmann spruce dominated forests are restored. Fires would have a more devastating effect than spruce beetle because more than just the spruce would be affected. Where fires affect the spruce/fir type there exist an increased potential for a cover type conversion from spruce/fir to grasses and shrubs lasting many years. There is also a potential for a type conversion from a mixed conifer to a Douglas fir type. Because of the removal of other conifer within the mixed conifer type by a fire, bare mineral soil would be exposed. This is an ideal site for seedling germination for the remaining Douglas fir. Mixed conifer stands containing aspen would see an increase in suckering with scattered Douglas fir. To help minimize impacts to spruce/fir and mixed conifer from prescribed fire, as described in the EIS, within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. In addition, no fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands would be allowed. After prescribed fire treatments, if needed to meet LRMP standards, spruce/fir and mixed conifer would be replanted. Vegetative Structural Stage The structural characteristics for VSS are common for all alternatives; therefore, they are being addressed in the, “Effects Common to all Alternatives” section. The only distinguishing characteristic that is different is the number of acres affected within each alternative. Economics The cost to implement Alternative 5, option 1 is approximately $7.7 million and the cost to implement alternative 5, option 2 is approximately $8 million. Compared to alternative 1 ($178 million) the cost to implement alternative 5, options 1 or 2 is considerably less than alternative 1. See appendix B for a breakdown of the costs. Indirect Effects A long-term concern for the aspen is the health of the aspen overstory. Walters et al. 1982 and Solarik et al. 2012 discuss results related to partial harvest of aspen. Waters et al. focuses more on regeneration and concludes that more trees harvested and/or the lower the BA after treatment the more sprouts there were. He also concludes that their minimum (6,000 sprouts per acre) was achieved on partial harvest but grazing impacts wiped them out on some of the plots within the study. Solarik et al. talks some about regeneration but the primary focus is the overstory. In his research he indicates that there is an increase in aspen mortality after harvest activities. Sunscald is a concern related to management alternatives where aspen overstory retention is the goal. Sunscald is thought to be a mortality factor; however, both research papers conclude that although sunscald was a factor and caused some mortality it was not the primary cause. Cankers and wind damage (or a combination of both) was the primary cause of death with sunscald being the entry point for the canker. Ironically, in Solarik et al., the more BA removed the higher the death rate of overstory aspen. Conversely, Waters et al., requires more BA removed to increase reproduction. Solarik et al. points out that higher mortality rates occurred 5 years and increased higher yet 10 years later. Since mechanical treatments in any alternative and options have aspen overstory retention within the aspen cover type it is likely that an unknown number of aspen overstory trees will die. Areas on Monroe Mountain where aspen was retained at low basal area are showing symptoms of sunscald and may be lost. Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects area (CEA) is Monroe Mountain (see appendix A for a map of the CEA). Total CEA acres are 175,706 surrounding 11,805 acres of private property. Monroe Mountain lies near the center of the Fishlake National Forest. The southern part of Monroe Mountain falls outside the project boundary but is included as part of the cumulative affects area because there is likely to be activity that may affect this project. There are no known activities associated with BLM lands that surround the mountain; therefore, that area was not considered for inclusion. Table 26 below outlines the cumulative effects for alternative 5. Harvest and prescribed burn are the past activities associated with alternative 5. Wildfire acres, although not a management activity, are included because they have had an effect on vegetation and have occurred throughout the CEA in the past. Past activities have affected 19 percent of the total acreage within the cumulative effects boundary. Alternative 5 will impact an additional 18 percent of the area. In addition, future activities scheduled for 2015 include 5,778 acres of prescribed fire. Activities past, present and future will impact 39 percent of the cumulative effects area (Table 25). Table 25- Alternative 5 cumulative effects. Alternative 5 Activity Past Activity Acres % of Past CEA Impacted (Acres) Alt 5 Acres % of CEA Impacted Foreseeable Future Acres Total Activity Acres % CEA Impacted Harvest 5,774 3% 15,072 9% 0 20,846 12% Prescribed Burn 13,998 8% 15,872 9% 5,778 35,648 20% Wildfire 12,894 7% 0 0% 0 12,894 7% Total 32,666 19% 30,944 18% 5,778 64,414 39%  Past activities come from every decade since the 1960s. Past activities from 1960 to 1990 will have little cumulative bearing on cover type vegetation because those areas are largely recovered from past activities and are in various stages of development. Therefore the discussion will center on those activities from 2000 to the present. Past activities in the 2000 decade totals 4 percent with a 5 percent increase in the 2010 decade Table 26.    Table 26- Past and foreseeable future activities by decade.  2000's 2010's Total- by Activity Harvest Acres 1,156 3,035 4,191 Prescribed Burn Acres 1,291 11,597 12,888 Wildfire Acres 4,192 1,520 5,712 Total 6,639 16,152 22,791 Percentage by Decade 4% 9% 13%  Aspen Cover Type Harvest and/or fire within past activities have removed most conifers within the type. Even-aged management has been the goal, removing all trees and regenerating aspen. Within the type it has been largely successful. To that end, fire treatments for this alternative should be as successful as in the past. Option 1 mechanical treatments will result in two-aged stands with no conifer. Option 1 will also move the successional stage back and, for a time, create a pure stand of aspen. Option 2 treatments will not show a whole lot of change in reference to overstory composition and structure. Leaving the conifer in the overstory will result in succession progressing. Past treatments particularly those from the 1990 to 2010 decades, in conjunction with option 1 mechanical treatments and prescribed fire, would decrease the number of mid to late-seral aspen acres because these stands would be in an earlier successional stage, the treatment would last longer across a larger area. Table 27 shows that the aspen cover type will have a 44 percent affect across the CEA. The past treatments in concert with the proposed treatments (regardless of option 1 or option 2 treatments) should provide a good mosaic of age classes and still maintain biological diversity. Mixed Conifer/Spruce/fir Past activities combined with proposed activities would have the following effects. Thin barked trees such as Engelmann spruce and sub-alpine are all less fire hardy and are killed more readily than Douglas fir (Hood and Miller 2007). This would tend to skew composition weighted more heavily to Douglas fir and white fir. Regardless of species, fire is lethal to the smaller trees. If there is a crown fire, all trees would likely die.  Option 1 combined with past activities would create a mosaic of stands with uneven-aged stands dominating from the mechanical treatment while the fire treatment areas would remove trees from all age classes and/or may eliminate some stands. Over all cumulative effects would reflect a landscape with uneven-aged structure in a mosaic pattern. Fifty percent of mixed conifer acres and 36 percent of spruce/fir acres would be affected across the CEA (Table 27). Option 2 combined with past activities would stands with (at least temporarily) less smaller trees and changing the structure one that is skewed to the larger classes.    Table 27- CEA affects by cover type.  Alternative 5 Current Acres of Cover Type in CEA Mechanical Treatment Option1 and 2 Prescribed Fire Treatment 60% Burned Total Acres affected in CEA Aspen 31129 6736 11676 7006 13742 Percentage  22%  23% 44% Mixed Conifer 5220 92 4190 2514 2606 Percentage  2%  48% 50% Spruce/fir 14392 2905 3810 2286 5191 Percentage  20%  16% 36% Old Growth Old growth will decline by 9 percent via past and present actions and decline and additional 1% through foreseeable future actions, totaling 10% for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 28). Table 28- CEA effects on old growth for alternative 5. Cumulative Effects- Old Growth   Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 5  Acres of Old Growth Affected  Past, Present and Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48330 14121 0 0 0 0 29%         Alt 5 48,330 14,121 4,616 228 4,844 20% 19% Effects Common to All Alternatives Vegetative structural stage (VSS) is being discussed here because the effects are common to all the alternatives. The only difference is the number of acres being affected by prescribed fire and mechanical treatments. The desired condition for VSS (in percent) is as follows: VSS 1, 10 percent; VSS 2, 10 percent; VSS 3, 20 percent; VSS 4, 20 percent; VSS 5, 20 percent; and VSS 6, 20 percent. To maintain consistency with the rest of this document the discussion will proceed with a break down between the cover types. Aspen Cover Type Table 29 compares VSS for the aspen cover type between alternative 1 and the other alternatives and options.  Table 29 would indicate that alternative 1 has better structure than all other alternatives; however, there are a couple of items to note about that. 1) Seral stands have a high degree of conifer and those conifers are longer lived than aspen. Although you cannot necessarily correlate age and diameter, larger trees tend to be older. Trees in the VSS 5 and 6 are shown in Table 29 to increase in percent due largely to the conifers present; and 2) As time progresses, seral aspen will likely change to either a mixed conifer or spruce/fir cover type. Stable stands would not be affected by conifers but more aspen stand conversion would lead to less aspen diversity in terms of structure across the mountain.  All alternatives option 1 show a slight surge in VSS 1, 10 years after treatment. The number runs on a 10 year cycle and would show a higher result right after treatment than currently shows. Regardless, it is a lower value in all the years than alternative 1 and never fully meets the desired. Alternative 1 meets it only in its current year. Vegetative Structural Stage 2 is better in all alternatives in option 1 than alternative 1. Aspen have a higher rate of growth in the early years, more so than conifers. Cutting and fire initiates suckering whereas alternative 1 has little to no suckering; therefore, a higher percentage within this class is presented. Vegetative Structural Stage 3, 4, 5, and 6 have better percentages than any of the other alternatives within option 1; however, the balance between classes is better achieved within 100 years than alternative 1. Within the VSS 5 and 6 classes under alternatives 2 through 5, option 1 the size class is lacking and would likely always be lacking within the aspen cover type (especially VSS 6 class). Although aspen can achieve 24 plus inches in diameter, the sizes are not common.  All alternatives, option 2 shows a slight surge in VSS 1, 10 years after treatment. Two items are different from option 1. First, overstory conifers are still present and producing seed thus leading to conifer regeneration. Second, aspen regeneration has been reduced because of the conifer production. Alternative 1 is still better than this option but through time this alternative maintains some presence within the class. All other classes within option 2 are better than alternative 1. This is likely due to the presence of conifer within this option.                  Table 29- Vegetative Structural Stage comparison through time between Alternative 1 and all Alternatives and Options for the aspen cover type. VSS Class  1 2 3 4 5 6 Alternative 1 Aspen Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 Current 13.60% 15.50% 56.78% 12.62% 1.11% 0.39% year 50 1.02% 32.32% 37.66% 23.60% 4.83% 0.58% year 100 2.12% 1.56% 33.51% 36.81% 21.17% 4.83% Alternatives 2 through 5- Option 1 Aspen Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 after treatment 1.81% 49.88% 36.57% 10.81% 0.93% 0.00% year 50 0.00% 70.80% 17.90% 10.30% 1.10% 0.00% year 100 0.00% 52.80% 27.70% 17.30% 2.20% 0.00% Alternative 2 through 5- Option 2 Aspen Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 after treatment 6.90% 15.31% 54.13% 20.42% 1.89% 1.34% year 50 0.64% 73.12% 12.58% 11.67% 1.95% 0.33% year 100 1.03% 4.73% 69.56% 12.14% 9.66% 2.88%  Mixed Conifer Cover Type Table 30 compares VSS for the mixed conifer cover type between alternative 1 and all other alternatives and options.  Option 1 treatments are slightly lower in VSS 1 and 3, than alternative 1. Both alternative 1 and option 1 meet the desired either in its current state or after treatment within VSS 1, 2, and 3. Vegetative Structural Stage 4 is slightly better in option 1. Neither alternative 1 nor alternatives 2 through 5, option 1 fully meet the desired for VSS 5 and 6. Fifty years from now option 1 for alternatives 2 through 5 is better overall than alternative 1 for VSS 5 and 6. Alternate 1 has a higher percentage of VSS 1, 2, 3, and 4 but both meet the desired. One hundred years from now shows a decrease in VSS 1 for option 1 treatments as compared to alternative 1. Vegetative Structural Stage 2, 3, 4, and 5 in Alternative 1 and Option1 meet the desired. VSS 6 is not fully met by any of the alternatives but is closer to the desired and is trending upwards in Alternatives 2-5.  Option 2 treatments when compared to alternative1 show that the desired is being met by both alternatives in VSS 2 and 3. Vegetative Structural Stage 1 is being met by alternative 1 and not by option 2; however, option 2 meets the desired for VSS 4 but not in alternative 1. Neither alternative meets the desired condition for VSS 5 and 6. Fifty years after treatment indicates a further decrease in VSS 1 within option1 treatments, fall far below the desired while there is an increase in VSS 1 for alternative 1. Vegetative Structural Stage 2 and 4 meet the desired in both alternatives while VSS 3 only meets the desired in alternative 1. Neither alternative fully meets the desired within VSS 5 and 6 by year 50.  Year 100 shows a decrease in VSS 1 in both alternatives; however, alternative 1 still meets the desired. Vegetative Structural Stage 3 and 4 meet the desired for both alternatives while only alternative 1 meets the desired for VSS 1 and 2. Only option 2 meets the desired for VSS 5 and alternative 1 does not. Neither alternative fully meets the desired for VSS 6; however, both are trending in that direction.  Table 30- Vegetative Structural Stage comparison between alternative 1 and all other alternatives and options for the mixed conifer cover type. VSS Class  1 2 3 4 5 6 Alternative 1 Mixed Conifer Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 Current 12.97% 19.69% 42.24% 19.32% 4.25% 1.52% year 50 68.00% 33.56% 33.37% 23.41% 6.58% 2.40% year 100 19.00% 10.29% 42.91% 29.39% 12.89% 4.34% Alternatives 2 through 5- Option 1 Mixed Conifer Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 after treatment 10.22% 25.70% 35.27% 21.38% 5.48% 1.95% year 50 10.81% 30.78% 23.94% 19.97% 10.21% 4.29% year 100 2.89% 30.92% 22.35% 18.95% 16.28% 8.61% Alternative 2 through 5- Option 2 Mixed Conifer Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 after treatment 4.84% 24.93% 29.75% 31.47% 6.68% 2.34% year 50 1.09% 42.15% 16.17% 28.61% 8.51% 3.46% year 100 0.38% 4.38% 45.32% 24.24% 20.08% 5.60% Spruce/fir Cover Type Table 31 compares VSS for the spruce/fir cover type between alternative 1 and all other alternatives and options.  Both alternative 1 and option 1 meet the desired for VSS 1, 2, 3, and 4 while neither meets the desired condition for VSS 5 and 6. In year 50, option 1 meets the desired for VSS 1 while alternative 1 does not. Vegetative Structural Stage classes 2, 3, and 4 are meeting the desired for both while VSS 5 and 6 are still not meeting the desired. By year 100 neither alternative 1 nor option 2 meet the desired for VSS 1. Both meet the desired for VSS classes 2, 3, and 4. Neither meets the desired for VSS 5 and 6. Alternative 1 and option 1 are showing a trend towards meeting the desired throughout most of the VSS classes. Alternative 1 meets the desired for VSS 1, while option 2 does not. Vegetative Structural Stage 2, 3, and 4 is met by both while neither meets the desired for VSS 5 and 6. By year 50 neither alternative nor option 2 fully meet the desired condition. Vegetative Structural Stage 2 and 4 are being met by both while VSS 3 is being met by alternative 1, only. Neither fully meets desired conditions for VSS 5 and 6. Year 100 still shows a downward shift in VSS 1 so much so that neither alternative 1 nor option 2 fully meets VSS 1. Vegetative Structural Stage 2, 3, and 4 are being met by both. Vegetative Structural Stage 5 and 6 are fully met by neither; however, VSS 5 for option 2 is only 0.74 of a percent away from meeting the desired. Both alternative 1 and option 2 are trending towards meeting the desired through time.                      Table 31- Vegetative Structural Stage comparison between alternative 1 and all other alternatives and options for the spruce/fir cover type. VSS Class  1 2 3 4 5 6 Alternative 1 Spruce/fir Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 Current 13.39% 15.85% 41.24% 21.00% 6.19% 2.34% year 50 6.40% 21.83% 29.84% 28.58% 9.54% 3.81% year 100 4.20% 15.76% 25.42% 32.56% 15.01% 7.07% Alternatives 2 through 5- Option 1 Spruce/fir Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 after treatment 20.10% 14.58% 32.15% 21.66% 7.86% 3.65% year 50 10.14% 32.09% 19.64% 20.62% 12.04% 5.47% year 100 3.47% 31.92% 19.74% 18.60% 16.53% 9.74% Alternative 2 through 5- Option 2 Spruce/fir Desired 10 10 20 20 20 20 after treatment 8.78% 12.92% 33.97% 32.33% 8.69% 3.32% year 50 2.67% 28.14% 15.42% 36.91% 12.74% 4.11% year 100 1.66% 12.48% 23.82% 34.98% 19.26% 7.80%         Climate Change Initial direction was given to analyze for effects on climate change in a letter written by Abigail Kimbell, Chief of the Forest Service in 2009 (Kimbell 2009). New guidance was given, for Federal Agencies, through a 2014 Draft CEQ (Committee of Environmental Quality). This guidance is not a rule or regulation, and the recommendations it contains may not apply to a particular situation based upon the individual facts and circumstances. This guidance does not change or substitute for any law, regulation, or other legally binding requirement, and is not legally enforceable. The use of non-mandatory language such as “guidance,” “recommend,” “may,” “should,” and “can,” is intended to describe CEQ policies and recommendations. The use of mandatory terminology such as “must” and “required” is intended to describe controlling requirements under the terms of NEPA and the CEQ regulations, but this document does not establish legally binding requirements in and of itself. The new draft guidance recommends addressing climate change via analyzing GHG emissions and carbon storage. As per the draft document, CEQ defines GHG emissions as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride. Analysis This section will look at how each alternative effects climate change as it relates to vegetation changes through management and fire. Although some information will likely be available for GHG emissions and there is quantitative data concerning volume of the removed trees; what the quantities of GHG emission would likely be, given volume removal, is unknown at this time. That part of the analysis will be mostly qualitative in nature.  To give a better understanding about what constitutes an emission, it is important to understand what plants, in general, need to sustain their life processes. Plants need minerals, water and carbon to survive. From a physiological perspective, all plants (not just trees) need carbon and water to produce the sugar necessary for growth and development. Plants get this sugar through a process known as photosynthesis. Photosynthesis, as defined by the Dictionary of Forestry (Helms, 1998), is the manufacture of organic compounds, particularly carbohydrates, in the chlorophyll cells of plants from carbon dioxide, water, and enzymes in the presence of light as the energy source. The by-product is oxygen and water vapor. Also worth noting, photosynthesis is dependent on favorable temperature and moisture conditions as well as an adequate atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration.  http://www.the-simple-homeschool.com/image-files/easyphotosynthesis.gif Figure 44- Photosynthesis chart.  Figure 44 shows the photosynthetic process. From the equation, C6H12O6 is the sugar. This sugar is stored in the bole, branches, leaves/needles and roots of the trees. In fact, Tappeiner (2007) states that nearly half of the energy that a stand “fixes” is consumed in respiration and other physiological processes. There is carbon stored in soil, but vegetation is what we are referring to here so the bole, branches, leaves, and roots of the tree all contain the stored carbon and each will contribute some amount to either an emission or storage after project completion.  Traditionally, forester’s focused their efforts on volume for a given stand or individual trees. The purpose of that focus was mainly to determine how productive a given stand of trees are to produce wood fiber products. Forester’s still focus on volume but the measure can also be applied to carbon sequestration and storage. Net volume is usually used to determine volume for wood fiber production. Diameter caps are usually the metric used for net volume. Gross volume takes into account of all the volume accumulated from all diameters. For the purposes of this section, the volume data is for live trees only and will use gross volume. Dead tree volume is already stored in the tree and no new additions of carbon storage will take place. Determining volume in this context gives a way to determine how fast a stand would grow and therefore, how fast a stand would remove carbon from the atmosphere. So this will be the first thing that will be analyzed for carbon storage and sequestration. The second will be what the effects on each cover type might be if a large change in climate were to occur.  This paragraph will discuss the volume. Differences between alternatives are related to acres and options. Primary effects will come between the options. For clarity and to maintain consistency with the rest of this document, the following paragraphs will address volume by cover type. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 ft3/ac/yr Aspen Cover Type Cubic Foot Volume Per Year Alt 1 Option 1 Option 2 Stand volume growth (PAI or periodic annual increment) is what we’ll look at here. Tappeiner (2007) describes PAI as the annual growth of a stand, usually for the previous 5-10 years. In the case of this analysis it is 10 years. Tappeiner also states that as stand density increases volume growth increases until severe inter-tree competition occurs. Then growth and yield may decrease from the loss of trees by self-thinning, poor tree vigor, and in some cases stand stagnation. It is common to analyze individual stands for production because individual stands have different growth rates. In this case we are looking at cover types as a whole so averages are used for the combined stands within the subsequent paragraphs. Suffice it to say that productivity will vary from high to low within the project area as a whole. Mechanical Analysis Aspen Cover Type Figure 45 below shows stand growth comparison between alternative 1 and mechanical options 1 and 2 for the aspen cover type. The alternatives are not discussed until later. Alternative 1 starts out at around 58 cubic feet (cuft) per year, peaks at 65 cuft and declines through time to a low of 28 by year 2114. Both option 1 and 2 start at zero because that is the time harvest occurs and there is no stand growth. Option 1 is a sigmoidal (s-shaped) curve peaking at the beginning at about 48 cuft and declining in stand growth at 20 cuft by year 2064. From 2064 to 2104 the volume increases at a steady rate and begins to decline again in 2114. The decline from 2034 to 2064 is likely due to a lack of full site occupancy and a possibly decline in the remaining overstory trees. Option 2 is marked by a slow decline in growth over the cycle, peaking around 2044 at 42 cuft and ending at 26 cuft.   Figure 45- Aspen volume growth between alternative 1 and options 1 and 2. So what does this mean in terms of climate? Tappiener (2007) lists some authors that have done studies related to photosynthetic process and trees removing carbon from the atmosphere. The authors of those studies were Smithwick and others (2002), Acker and others (2002), and Acker et al. (2002). Most of the work was done in the Cascades but they looked at forests from young to old. Tappiener concludes that the volume growth of wood in forest stands is closely related to rates of C fixation. The average age for the aspen cover type is 124 years. Campbell and Bartos (2001) describe aspen stands over 100 years of age as declining, from an ecological perspective. This can also be seen from the graph, particularly the more rapid volume decline in Alternative 1. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 ft3/ac/yr Mixed Conifer Cover Type Cubic Foot Volume Per Year Alt 1 Option 1 Option 2 In the short term, Option 2 appears to be the better volume producer and the higher carbon consumer. Long term, Option 1 exceeds both Option 2 and Alternative 1  I did not discuss or compare alternatives 2 through 5 because either option 1 or 2 could be deployed in any of the alternatives. Since the main difference is the number of acres being treated, the alternative that reflects the highest number of acres treated would remove and store the most carbon from the atmosphere (alternative 4). Volume removed from any of the alternatives is not reflected in the graph and would be considered already stored carbon (they would no longer be able to remove any more from the atmosphere through time). Carbon and/GHG emissions, from mechanical treatments, would be less than what is removed since most of the stored carbon exists in the boles of trees. What remains are the tops, branches, stumps, and roots. They would be left to decay or be burned. Mixed Conifer Cover Type Figure 46 below shows stand growth comparison between alternative 1 and options 1 and 2 for the mixed conifer cover type. The alternatives are not discussed until later. Alternative 1 starts relatively high at 46 cuft and peaks in 2034 at 48 cuft then slowly declines to 25 cuft at the end of the cycle. Option 1 is a series of peaks and valleys. This is reflective of the way the FVS model functions to perform the uneven aged analysis. The valleys are indicative of volume removal at a cutting cycle and reflect mostly zero stand growth (meaning stand growth was less than what was removed). Between cycles stand growth exceeds alternative 1 and option 2. Option 2 shows a starting point around 32 cuft rising to a peak of 45 cuft and declining to meet the same volume per year as alternative 1 by 2114.   Figure 46- Mixed conifer volume growth between alternative 1 and options 1 and 2. It is hard to predict whether alternative 1, option 1 or option 2 is the best at carbon removal or storage. What can be said is that alternative 1 and option 2 are declining throughout the period. Option 1 is up and down but at each peak exceeds the volume attained in alternative 1 or option 2 even at the end. If this pattern continues it is likely that option 1 would be the better option because it is a constant high at nearly 40 cuft at every peak. Conversely, alternative 1 and option 2 continue on a downward slope. It is likely that the downward slope of alternative 1 and option 2 is caused by the total age of the type at the end of the cycle. The average age of the type is 105. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 ft3/ac/yr Spruce-fir Cover Type Cubic Foot Volume Per Year Alt 1 Option 1 Option 2 By the end of the cycle it would be 205, approaching old growth. In old forests the amount of carbon added to the forest is about equal to the amount lost by respiration of dead biomass (Tappiener 2007).  I did not discuss or compare alternatives 2 through 5 because either option 1 or 2 could be deployed in any of the alternatives. Since the only difference is the number of acres, the alternative that reflects the highest number of acres treated would remove and store the most carbon from the atmosphere (alternative 4). Volume removed from any of the alternatives is not reflected in the graph and would be considered already stored carbon (they would no longer be able to remove any more from the atmosphere through time). Carbon and/GHG emissions, from mechanical treatments, would be less than what is removed since most of the stored carbon exists in the boles of trees. What remains are the tops, branches, stumps, and roots. They would be left to decay or be burned. Spruce-fir Cover Type Figure 47 below shows stand growth comparison between alternative 1 and options 1 and 2 for the mixed conifer cover type. The alternatives are not discussed until later. Alternative 1 peaks at 35 at the beginning of the cycle and slowly declines to 20 cuft by the end. Option 1 is similar in style to option 1 in the mixed conifer for the same reason. Volume tops out at about 37 cuft and then levels off at around 30 cuft. The pattern appears constant after 2104. The highest volume accumulation occurs with option 2. That value is 42 cuft in 2044. After that time it slowly declines until it nearly matches alternative 1.   Figure 47- Spruce-fir volume growth between alternative 1 and options 1 and 2. It is hard to predict whether alternative 1, option 1 or option 2 is the best at carbon removal or storage. What can be said is that alternative 1 and option 2 are declining throughout the period. Option 1 is up and down but at each peak exceeds the volume attained in alternative 1 or option 2 even at the end. If this pattern continues it is likely that option 1 would be the better alternative because it is a constant high at nearly 40 cuft at every peak. Conversely, alternative 1 and option 2 continue on a downward slope. It is likely that the downward slope of alternative 1 and option 2 is caused by the total age of the type at the end of the cycle. The average age of the type is 105. By the end of the cycle it would be 205, approaching old growth. In old forests the amount of carbon added to the forest is about equal to the amount lost by respiration of dead biomass (Tappiener 2007).  I did not discuss or compare Alternatives 2 through 5 because either option 1 or 2 could be deployed in any of the alternatives. Since the only difference is the number of acres, the alternative that reflects the highest number of acres treated would remove and store the most carbon from the atmosphere (alternative 4). Volume removed from any of the alternatives is not reflected in the graph and would be considered already stored carbon (they would no longer be able to remove any more from the atmosphere through time). Carbon and/GHG emissions, from mechanical treatments, would be less than what is removed since most of the stored carbon exists in the boles of trees. What remains are the tops, branches, stumps, and roots. They would be left to decay or be burned.  Conclusions Throughout this document the discussion has centered on cover types. This was done mainly because the LRMP reads this way. Although the purpose and need for action is to restore aspen ecosystems, two other cover types were covered (mixed conifer and spruce/fir) by this analysis. Many aspen stands are adjacent to mixed conifer and spruce/fir stands. Aspen also occurs in the mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types. A large portion of the project proposes to use prescribed fire to improve aspen. To use fire in a safe and effective manner, it became necessary to treat within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types, as well. Many items were discussed in this report ranging from the effects of fire on cover types, insect and disease current and likely impacts, and economics. Two environmental indicators were analyzed as part of this report; VSS and old growth. A large portion of the preceding paragraphs will focus on the environmental indicators. Old Growth Table 32- All alternatives old growth comparison. Old Growth  Mech. Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 2 8,186 92 19,795 5,479 48,330 14,121 5,571 8,550 18%           Alt 3 13,648 236 18,814 5,223 48,330 14,121 5,459 8,662 18%           Alt 4 19,837 411 16,462 4,547 48,330 14,121 4,958 9,163 19%           Alt 5 15,072 291 15,872 4,325 48,330 14,121 4,616 9,505 20%  All of the alternatives and options meet the requirement in the LRMP of 5 percent or more in old Growth. Alternative 1 (no action) is currently at 29 percent old growth for the project as a whole. Overall, option 1and 2 treatments show a 9 to 11 percent decrease in forested old growth compared to alternative 1. Additionally, old growth declines by an additional 1% for each alternative when factoring the cumulative effects. All alternatives and options (considering past, present and future) meet the LRMP and the changes (plus or minus) are minimal, in terms of percent, amongst one another (Table 32). Vegetative Structural Stage The LRMP discusses criteria for VSS based on cover type and this paragraph will as well. Aspen Cover Type It is clear that the conifer component is shifting the percentages farther to the larger size classes. There is a substantial difference in VSS 5 and 6 in alternative 1 vs the other alternatives and options. It was expected that VSS 5 and 6 would be more represented within option 2 than option 1 because only conifers below 8 inches DBH were removed within option 2. All overstory conifers remained and grew over time. Option 1 treatments lack conifer and are more pure aspen compared to option 2 and alternative 1. Vegetative Structural Stage 5 and 6 are slowly increasing through time. Mixed Conifer Cover Type None of the alternatives fully meet the desired condition; however, they are all trending towards the desired as time progresses. Given the high density associated with alternative 1, option 1 treatments would give a better result for a longer period of time. Higher stand densities slow growth, increase risk to insect and disease, and increase risk to crown fire. Given this, option 1 is a better treatment for maintaining structure in the future. Overall, VSS 5 and 6 percentages are better in option 2 than either alternative 1 or option 1; however, the type changes from an uneven-aged to an even-aged type. The risks of cover type conversion are certainly higher for this option. Bark beetles, in particular, usually prefer larger older trees. Option 2 leaves the larger older trees. Spruce/fir Cover Type The results for this type, under any alternative, do not fully meet the desired condition but are trending in that direction as time progresses. Option 1 treatments are similar through time as alternative 1. The primary difference between the two relates to density. Alternative 1 is denser than option 1. Option 2 treatments are similar to the results from alternative 1 and option 1 with one primary difference; structure. Like mixed conifer option 2, structure for option 2 is even-aged. Given the current spruce beetle outbreak, removing the lower classes of trees seems almost silly. The risk of a cover type change is high because few replacement trees would exist after treatment and the overstory trees would likely die due to the beetle. It is the professional opinion of the District Forester that option 1 is the better option for VSS. Option 1 maintains uneven-aged structure within mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types while lowering density. Given the current beetle outbreak, this is a more prudent action to maintain mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types, and still provide, and maintain structure for the future. Vegetative Structural Stage declines seen in the aspen cover type within option 1 can be offset by maintaining and preventing a type conversion. Biological diversity will be maintained across a broader scale by preventing further aspen stand degradation due to conifer encroachment. Averages of VSS percentages fit with what has been seen on the Fishlake National Forest for these cover types. Data collected on other projects has revealed that most stands are in VSS 2 and 3 followed by VSS 4. Vegetative Structural Stage 5 and 6 are rarely identified as the dominant structure; however, they are usually an element within a stand. It is more common to see mixed conifer and spruce/fir cover types with higher values for VSS 5 and 6. Logically this makes sense because they are longer-lived species and usually reside on more productive sites than aspen. The problem is the older and larger they become the more susceptible they become to other things such as insects, diseases, and fires. Therefore, even though the condition can get to where the LRMP desires, it usually does not stay there that long. Economics Table 33: Implementation cost for all alternatives.  Option 1 Implementation Cost Option 2 Implementation Cost Alternative 1 – Wildfire Cost $178.5 Million $178.5 Million Alternative 2 $7.1 Million* $7.2 Million* Alternative 3 $8.2 Million* $9.6 Million* Alternative 4 $8.7 Million* $9.2 Million* Alternative 5 $7.7 Million* $8.0 Million* * This implementation cost does not include any wildfire cost. Implementation is expected to occur over approximately 10 years. During this 10 year timeframe, wildfires are likely to occur. The location, size, and duration of the wildfire(s) is unknown so wildfire cost was not included into the implementation cost. Table 33 outlines the implementation cost for all of the alternatives. Compared to alternative 1, of the action alternatives, alternative 3 option 2 would be the most expensive to implement. Alternative 2 (either option) would be the cheapest to implement. Implementation cost for alternatives 3 and 4 (either option) are similar in cost. Alternative 5 implementation costs fall between alternatives 2, 3, and 4. Suppressing wildfire, alternative 1, would be the most expensive; 18 to 25 times higher than any alternative and option. There is no known dollar value to restoring aspen but it could be argued that losing aspen would be a greater cost in terms of ecological and biological diversity than the dollar value to restore. There is a risk that a wildfire could occur during implementation. Climate Change This project would remove trees and would likely have little impact on carbon released into the atmosphere. Harvested wood from this project would mostly come from the bole of the tree. The majority of the trees volume is in the bole; consequently, the majority of the carbon is stored here. It stands to reason, therefore, that the carbon stored in the bole would have no emissions when hauled off site. Smith, et al. 2006 explains this in Methods for Calculating Forest Ecosystem and Harvest Carbon with Standard Estimates for Forest Types of the United States. He says, “When wood is harvested and removed from the forest, not all of the carbon flows immediately to the atmosphere. In fact, the portion of harvested carbon sequestered in long-lasting wood products may not be released to the atmosphere for years or even decades.” Harvested wood products serve as reservoirs of carbon that are not immediately emitted to the atmosphere at the time of harvest. Furthermore, the amount of carbon sequestered in products depends on how much wood is harvested and removed from the forest, to what products the harvested wood is allocated, and the half-life of wood in these products. The stump and roots would be left on site and these would contribute some to GHG emissions, albeit slowly over time as they decompose. Branches and leaves/needles (slash) would contribute the most to immediate GHG emissions because they would be piled and burned. These emissions would be minor in terms of overall global GHG emissions.  Within every cover type alternative 1 results in the highest carbon consumption and storage; however, within every cover type it steadily declined and was either lower or equal to options 1 and 2. Although the difference between option 1 and 2 for carbon consumption and storage is minor, option 1 has a slightly higher consumption and storage of carbon over the long term. This is likely due to the uneven aged nature of the stand and the repeated lowering of density reducing competition and regeneration of younger more vigorous trees. As far as alternatives 2 through 5, those that employ option 1 and more acres of treatment would be the larger consumers and collectors of carbon (alternative 4).  The purpose and need of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems. In terms of climate this could be important. The prediction is for higher temperatures and continued/increased drought. If higher temperatures and continued/increased drought occurs, all tree species would likely move up in elevation and those species that reside at the lower elevations would likely decline. Since the aspen cover type currently reside across a wide elevational band and a wider latitudinal area than the other species on Monroe Mountain, aspen have the ability and may better adapt and be more resilient to climate change. Improving the aspen ecosystems by removing competing conifers, increasing regeneration and recruitment is expected to help aspen on Monroe Mountain be more resilient to climate change. The spruce-fir cover type needs cooler and wetter conditions than the other cover types and would likely decline. In the mixed conifer type, associated species such as spruce and fir (white and subalpine) would likely also decline with stand dominance turning more towards either pure Douglas-fir to Douglas-fir/aspen mix; hence, a cover type change.  In terms of alternatives, alternatives 2 through 5 would likely have less impact from carbon emissions than alternative 1. It is unknown when, how many acres, and/or where wildfires will occur on Monroe Mountain. What can be stated is that because of the uncertainty of these things, the amount of GHG emissions can be better controlled under alternatives 2 through 5 by controlling when, where and how prescribed fires would be implemented. The “when” portion has to be submitted and approved through Utah Smoke Management. The “where and how” is described in the Fire/Fuels Specialist Report and in the EIS. Alternatives 2 through 5 also emit less carbon due to mechanical treatments removing additional fuel which would not be burned. Best Available Science All of the research listed in the literature cited section is considered the best available science for this project. Site visitations to the project area, discussions with other professionals (fire, silviculturist, GIS, etc.), in addition to the comparative analysis and research has provided this document with the necessary background for scientific analysis. Compliance with the Forest Plan and Other Regulatory Direction This action responds to the goals and objectives outlined in the LRMP (1986). The desired conditions described above and the purpose and need for this project are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in chapter IV of the LRMP, and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). The proposed treatment units are within management areas 2B – Rural and Roaded Natural Recreation; 4A – Fish Habitat Improvement; 4B – Habitat for Management Indicator Species; 5A – Big Game Winter Range - Non-forested; 6B – Intensive Livestock Management; 7B – Wood-Fiber Production - Genetics; and 9F – Improved. The relevant goals and objectives are listed below: 1. Ecosystems are restored and maintained, consistent with land uses and historic fire regimes, through wildland fire use and prescribed fire (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-40). 2. Manage forest cover types to provide variety in stand sizes shape, crown closure, edge contrast, age structure and interspersion (LRMP p. IV-99). 3. Prescribed fire is authorized forest-wide (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-41). 4. Use prescribed fire to reduce fuel buildup and meet resource objectives (LRMP p. IV-5). 5. Reduce hazardous fuels; the full range of reduction methods is authorized, consistent with forest and MA emphasis and direction (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-41). 6. Identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened, and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals (LRMP IV-4). 7. Improve or maintain the quality of habitat on big game winter ranges (LRMP IV-4). 8. Maintain structural diversity of vegetation on management areas dominated by forested ecosystems (LRMP IV-11). 9. Manage aspen for retention where needed for wildlife, watershed, or esthetic purposes (LRMP IV-11). 10. Manage seral aspen stands for a diversity of age classes (LRMP IV-11). 11. Manage aspen to perpetuate the species and improve quality (LRMP IV-4). 12. Provide wood fiber while maintaining or improving other resource values LRMP IV-4). 13. Improve timber age class distribution and maintain species diversity (LRMP IV-4). 14. Manage tree stands using both commercial and noncommercial methods. Enhance visual quality, diversity, and insect and disease control (LRMP IV-62 and IV-84d). 15. Maintain and manage forested inclusions to provide a high level of forage production, wildlife habitat, and diversity (LRMP IV-112). 16. The area will have a mosaic of fully stocked stands that follow natural patterns and avoid straight lines and geometric shapes (LRMP IV-113). 17. Prevent and control insect infestation and disease (LRMP IV-5)  One goal of this project is to re-establish fire regimes to Monroe Mountain. Wildland fire is authorized forest-wide by the Utah Fire Amendment (A-41) under management area goal IV-3 (Diversity), except in the following areas:  1. Administrative sites; 2. Developed recreation sites; 3. Summer home sites; 4. Designated communication sites; 5. Oil and gas facilities; 6. Mining facilities; 7. Above-ground utility corridors; and, 8. High-use travel corridors.  The management response for these locations will be wildland fire suppression if they are threatened. In areas authorized for wildland fire use, the full range of management responses (from full suppression to monitoring of wildland fire activity) may be used. One goal is to increase the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (Utah Fire Plan 2001).  The District has also compared the action alternatives with the general direction and standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP to determine compliance, and found that the action alternatives are compliant with the general direction and standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP. This review, along with supporting rationale is found in the project record.  After this analysis was completed, an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory (NA and PFA) was found in the Indian Peak area. Approximately 310 acres of the NA and PFA overlap this aspen project. These 310 acres occur mostly in stable aspen. These 310 acres make up less than 1% of the project area. If these 310 acres were not treated, there would be little impact to VSS and old growth.    Literature cited Alexander, R. 1987. Ecology, silviculture, and management of the Engelmann spruce - subalpine fir type in the central and southern Rocky Mountains. USDA Forest Service, Agriculture Handbook No. 659, 144 pp.  Bartos, Dale L. 2007. Aspen. Chapter 3. USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-202.  Bartos, Dale L and Robert B. Campbell. May 1998. Water Depletion and Other Ecosystem Values Forfeited when Conifer Forests Displace Aspen Communities. Rangeland Management and Water Resources, American Water Resources Association. pg 427.  Bigler Christof, Dominik Kulakowski, and Thomas T. Veblen. 2005. Multiple Disturbance Interactions and Drought Influence Severity in Rocky Mountain Subalpine Forests. Ecology, 86(11), 2005, pp. 3018–3029 the Ecological Society of America. Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80903 USA.  Campbell, Robert B. 1995. A PRIMER FOR UNDERSTANDING THE VALUE, ECOLOGY, AND BIOLOGY OF QUAKING ASPEN (Populus tremuloides) ECOSYSTEMS. Forest Ecologist (ret).  Campbell, Robert B. and Dale Bartos. 2001. Aspen Ecosystems: Objectives for Sustaining Biodiversity. USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-P-18. pg 300. Rocky Mountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Logan, UT.  Costello, Sheryl L. and Brian Howell. April 2006. Biological Evaluation of Spruce Beetle and Mountain Pine Beetle Activity in the Sierra Madre Analysis Area on the Parks Ranger District, Medicine Bow-Routt National Forests and Thunder basin National Grassland. Biological Evaluation R2-06-09. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region, Renewable Resources, P.O. Box 25127, Lakewood, CO 80225  Council of Environmental Quality (CEQ). December 2014. Draft Climate Change Guidance.  Evans, A. M., R. G. Everett, S. L. Stephans, and J. A. Youtz. May 2011. Comprehensive Fuels Treatment Practices Guide for Mixed Conifer Forests: California, Central and Southern Rockies, and the Southwest. Forest Guild, US Forest Service.  Eyre, F.H. 1980. Forest Cover Types of the United States and Canada. Society of American Foresters. 5400 Grosvenor Lane, Washington, D.C. 20014. pg. 1 Graham, Russel T., Theresa B. Jain, and Mark Loseke. 2009. Fuel Treatments, Fire Suppression, and Their Interactions With Wildfire and its Effects: The Warm Lake Experience During the Cascade Complex of Wildfires in Central Idaho, 2007. USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-229.  Hamilton, Ronald C. April 1993. Characteristics of Old Growth Forests in the Intermountain Region. USDA Forest Service. Halloin, Louis. May 21, 2003. Major Defoliating Insects of the Intermountain West, Western Spruce Budworm and Douglas fir Tussock Moth. Washington Department of Natural Resources  Helms, 1998. Dictionary of Forestry. Society of American Foresters.  Hood, Sharon M. and Melanie Miller. November 2007. Fire Ecology and Management of the Major Ecosystems of Southern Utah. USDA, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. General Technical Report RMRS-GTR-202. pg. 16-17, 24 and chapter 2. Jenkins, Michael J., Elizabeth G. Hebertson, and Steven Munson. 2014. Spruce Beetle Biology, Ecology and Management in the Rocky Mountains: An Addendum to Spruce Beetle in the Rockies. Forests, 5, 21-71, ISSN 1999-4907. www.mdpi.com/journal/forests Kimbell, Abigail R. January 13, 2009. Climate Change Considerations in Project Level NEPA Analysis. WO, Washington, DC  Lost Lake Monitoring Report. 2014. USDA Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest. Margolis, Ellis Q., Thomas Swetnam, and Craig D. Allen. 2007. A Stand-Replacing Fire History in Upper Montane Forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains. Canadian Journal of Forestry, Res. Vol 37. pg 2228 Moghaddas, Jason J. 2006. A Fuel Treatment Reduces Potential Fire Severity and Increases Suppression Efficiency in a Sierran Mixed Conifer Forest. USDA Forest Service Proceedings. RMRS-P-41. Morelli, Toni Lyn. September 2009. The Status of Quaking Aspen (Populus tremuloides) in the Sierra Nevada. Pacific Southwest Research Station. USDA Forest Service. http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/topics/climate_change/ecosystem/quaking_aspen.shtml  Smith James E., Linda S. Heath, Kenneth E. Skog, and Richard A. Birdsey. 2006. Methods for Calculating Forest Ecosystem and Harvested Carbon with Standard Estimates for Forest Types of the United States. USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station. General Technical Report NE-343.  Solarik, Kevin A., W. Jan A. Volney, Victor J. Leffers, John R. Spence, and Andreas Hamann. 2012. Factors Affecting White Spruce and Aspen Survival After Partial Harvest. Journal of Applied Ecology. Centre for Enhanced Forest Management, Department of Renewable Resources, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2H1 and Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Northern Forestry Centre, 5320 122 Street, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6H 3S5.  Sutley, Nancy H. February 18, 2010. Draft NEPA Guidance on Consideration of the Effects of Climate Change and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Memorandum for Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies. Chair, Council on Environmental Quality.  Troyer, Jack G. March 2, 2007. Memo: Clarification of Meaning and Intent in Characteristics of Old Growth Forests in the Intermountain Region. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region, 324 25st, Ogden, UT 84401. Tappeiner, John C., Maguire, Douglas A., Harrington, Timothy B. 2007. Silviculture and Ecology of Western U.S. Forests. Oregon State University Press, 500 Kerr Administration, Corvalis, OR 97331-2122.pg. 20. http://oregonstate.edu/dept/press Utah Forest Restoration Working Group - Ecology Committee [Mary O’Brien, Paul Rogers, Kevin Mueller, Rob MacWhorter, Allen Rowley, Bill Hopkin, Bill Christensen, Paul Dremann]. 2010. Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah, Western Aspen Alliance, Utah State University, Logan, UT. 48 p. Walters, James W., Thomas E. Hinds, David W. Johnson, and Jerome Beatty. October 1982. Effects of Partial Cutting on Diseases, Mortality, and Regeneration of Rocky Mountain Aspen Stands. Research Paper RM-240, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Forest Service, USDA. Williams, Clinton K. (ret). December 2009. Properly Functioning Condition. Region 4, Ogden, Utah Appendix A      Appendix B    0.03                Monroe Aspen- Alternative 1      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($178,500,501.19)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $0.00       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($178,500,501.19)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  ---------  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- Wildfire- Total project acres 1 10 4833.1 ($4,323.00) ($20,893,491.30) ($178,225,718.76) $0.00 NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00  0 0 0 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 = = = = = = = =       ($178,500,501.19) $0.00       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS      Monroe Aspen- Alternative 2 Option 1      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($7,102,746.24)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $277,322.87       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($7,380,069.11)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 1 10 818.6 ($126.50) ($103,552.90) ($883,327.24) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- CCF 1 10 1247.8 $13.50 $16,845.30 $0.00 $143,693.83 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- CCF 1 10 580.2 $27.00 $15,665.40 $0.00 $133,629.04 HARVEST- Aspen- CCF 1 10 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 818.6 ($98.37) ($80,525.68) ($723,372.69) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT- 70% of total acreage 2 12 573 ($56.19) ($32,196.87) ($289,228.68) $0.00 ROAD MAINTENANCE- ccf/mile 2 12 207.7 ($0.20) ($41.54) ($373.16) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 204.7 ($110.00) ($22,517.00) ($202,273.14) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 0.9 ($5,000.00) ($4,500.00) ($40,424.09) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 0.9 ($3,000.00) ($2,700.00) ($22,862.15) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1979.5 ($278.00) ($550,301.00) ($4,943,425.54) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($7,380,069.11) $277,322.87       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS     Monroe Aspen- Alternative 3 Option 1      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($8,203,437.39)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $534,539.19       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($8,737,976.58)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 1 10 1364.8 ($126.50) ($172,647.20) ($1,472,715.64) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- (ground based) CCF 1 10 2429.8 $13.50 $32,802.30 $0.00 $279,810.27 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- (ground based) CCF 1 10 1106 $27.00 $29,862.00 $0.00 $254,728.92 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- (helicopter log) CCF 4 10 97.9 ($125.00) ($12,237.50) ($69,773.23) $0.00 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- (helicopter log)CCF 4 10 167.6 ($125.00) ($20,950.00) ($119,448.34) $0.00 HARVEST- Aspen- CCF 1 10 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT-70% of total Acres 2 12 955.4 ($56.19) ($53,683.93) ($482,249.70) $0.00 ROAD MAINTENANCE-CCF/Miles 2 12 639.7 ($0.20) ($127.94) ($1,149.30) $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1364.8 ($98.37) ($134,255.38) ($1,206,033.52) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 0.9 ($5,000.00) ($4,500.00) ($40,424.09) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 0.9 ($3,000.00) ($2,700.00) ($22,862.15) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 341.2 ($110.00) ($37,532.00) ($337,154.84) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1881.4 ($278.00) ($523,029.20) ($4,698,439.41) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($8,737,976.58) $534,539.19       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS     Monroe Aspen- Alternative 4 Option 1      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($8,738,796.29)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $937,325.41       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($9,676,121.70)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 2 12 1983.7 ($126.50) ($250,938.05) ($2,254,209.18) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- CCF 2 12 3729.9 $13.50 $50,353.65 $0.00 $452,333.39 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- CCF 2 12 1999.6 $27.00 $53,989.20 $0.00 $484,992.01 HARVEST- ASPEN- CCF 2 12 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1983.7 ($98.37) ($195,136.57) ($1,752,937.21) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT- 70% of total acreage 2 12 1388.6 ($56.19) ($78,025.43) ($700,912.63) $0.00 ROAD MAINTANENCE- CCF/Mile 2 12 430.8 ($0.20) ($86.16) ($773.99) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 1.3 ($5,000.00) ($6,500.00) ($58,390.35) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 1.3 ($3,000.00) ($3,900.00) ($33,023.10) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 495.9 ($110.00) ($54,549.00) ($490,020.77) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1646.2 ($278.00) ($457,643.60) ($4,111,072.05) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($9,676,121.70) $937,325.41       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS     Monroe Aspen- Alternative 5 Option 1      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($7,683,219.46)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $664,972.17       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($8,348,191.64)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 2 12 1507.2 ($114.95) ($173,252.64) ($1,556,351.02) $0.00 HARVEST- CONIFERS- CCF 2 12 2650.5 $13.50 $35,781.75 $0.00 $321,432.12 HARVEST- CONIFERS- CCF 2 12 1416.4 $27.00 $38,242.80 $0.00 $343,540.05 HARVEST- ASPEN- CCF 2 4 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1507.2 ($114.96) ($173,267.71) ($1,556,486.42) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT- 70% of total acreage 2 12 1055 ($56.19) ($59,280.45) ($532,524.00) $0.00 ROAD MAINTANENCE- CCF/Mile 2 12 317.7 ($0.20) ($63.54) ($570.79) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 1.3 ($5,000.00) ($6,500.00) ($58,390.35) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 1.3 ($3,000.00) ($3,900.00) ($33,023.10) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 376.8 ($110.00) ($41,448.00) ($372,332.78) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1587.2 ($278.00) ($441,241.60) ($3,963,730.75) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($8,348,191.64) $664,972.17       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS     Monroe Aspen- Alternative 2 Option 2      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($7,164,790.84)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $215,195.27       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($7,379,986.10)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 1 10 818.6 ($126.50) ($103,552.90) ($883,327.24) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- CCF 1 10 974.5 $13.50 $13,155.75 $0.00 $112,221.22 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- CCF 1 10 447.1 $27.00 $12,071.70 $0.00 $102,974.05 HARVEST- Aspen- CCF 1 10 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 818.6 ($98.37) ($80,525.68) ($723,372.69) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT- 70% of total acreage 2 12 573 ($56.19) ($32,196.87) ($289,228.68) $0.00 ROAD MAINTENANCE- ccf/mile 2 12 161.5 ($0.20) ($32.30) ($290.16) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 204.7 ($110.00) ($22,517.00) ($202,273.14) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 0.9 ($5,000.00) ($4,500.00) ($40,424.09) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 0.9 ($3,000.00) ($2,700.00) ($22,862.15) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1979.5 ($278.00) ($550,301.00) ($4,943,425.54) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($7,379,986.10) $215,195.27       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS     Monroe Aspen- Alternative 3 Option 2      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($9,610,538.18)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $333,991.99       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($9,944,530.17)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 1 10 1364.8 ($126.50) ($172,647.20) ($1,472,715.64) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- CCF 1 10 1396.3 $13.50 $18,850.05 $0.00 $160,794.75 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- CCF 1 10 752 $27.00 $20,304.00 $0.00 $173,197.24 HARVEST- Aspen- CCF 1 10 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1364.8 ($114.96) ($156,897.41) ($1,409,429.85) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT-70% of total Acres 2 12 955.4 ($56.19) ($53,683.93) ($482,249.70) $0.00 ROAD MAINTENANCE-CCF/Miles 2 12 244.1 ($0.20) ($48.82) ($438.56) $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1364.8 ($98.37) ($134,255.38) ($1,206,033.52) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 0.9 ($5,000.00) ($4,500.00) ($40,424.09) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 0.9 ($3,000.00) ($2,700.00) ($22,862.15) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 341.2 ($110.00) ($37,532.00) ($337,154.84) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1881.4 ($278.00) ($523,029.20) ($4,698,439.41) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($9,944,530.17) $333,991.99       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS     Monroe Aspen- Alternative 4 Option 2      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($9,185,987.29)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $489,758.01       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($9,675,745.31)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 2 12 1983.7 ($126.50) ($250,938.05) ($2,254,209.18) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- CCF 2 12 1848.9 $13.50 $24,960.15 $0.00 $224,220.28 HARVEST- Spruce-fir- CCF 2 12 1094.8 $27.00 $29,559.60 $0.00 $265,537.74 HARVEST- ASPEN- CCF 2 12 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1983.7 ($98.37) ($195,136.57) ($1,752,937.21) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT- 70% of total acreage 2 12 1388.6 ($56.19) ($78,025.43) ($700,912.63) $0.00 ROAD MAINTANENCE- CCF/Mile 2 12 221.3 ($0.20) ($44.26) ($397.59) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 1.3 ($5,000.00) ($6,500.00) ($58,390.35) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 1.3 ($3,000.00) ($3,900.00) ($33,023.10) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 495.9 ($110.00) ($54,549.00) ($490,020.77) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1646.2 ($278.00) ($457,643.60) ($4,111,072.05) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($9,675,745.31) $489,758.01       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS    Monroe Aspen- Alternative 5 Option 2      FISHLAKE NATIONAL FOREST               PNV = ($8,016,509.67)         Interest Rate = 3 %              TOTAL DISCOUNTED POSITIVE EFFECTS = $331,388.57       TOTAL DISCOUNTED NEGATIVE EFFECTS = ($8,347,898.25)              POS/NEG EFFECT TOTAL DISCOUNTED DISCOUNTED  BEG END # OF PER UNIT POS/NEG EFFECT NEGATIVE POSITIVE POS/NEG EFFECT DESCRIPTION YR YR  UNITS PER YEAR PER YEAR EFFECTS EFFECTS -----------------------------  --  --  -------- -  --------------  --------------  --------------  -------------- NEPA 1 5 1 ($60,000.00) ($60,000.00) ($274,782.43) $0.00 SALE PREPARATION- Acre 2 12 1507.2 ($114.95) ($173,252.64) ($1,556,351.02) $0.00 HARVEST- Mixed Conifer- CCF 2 12 1219 $13.50 $16,456.50 $0.00 $147,830.88 HARVEST- Spruce- CCF 2 12 756.8 $27.00 $20,433.60 $0.00 $183,557.69 HARVEST- Aspen- CCF 2 4 0 $1.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 SALE ADMINISTRATION- Acre 2 12 1507.2 ($114.96) ($173,267.71) ($1,556,486.42) $0.00 SLASH TREATMENT- 70% of total acreage 2 12 1055 ($56.19) ($59,280.45) ($532,524.00) $0.00 ROAD MAINTANENCE- CCF/Mile 2 12 154.4 ($0.20) ($30.88) ($277.40) $0.00 Temporary Road Construction 2 12 1.3 ($5,000.00) ($6,500.00) ($58,390.35) $0.00 Temporary Road Removal 4 14 1.3 ($3,000.00) ($3,900.00) ($33,023.10) $0.00 Pile Burning- 25% of Total Acres 2 12 376.8 ($110.00) ($41,448.00) ($372,332.78) $0.00 Prescribed Burn 2 12 1587.2 ($278.00) ($441,241.60) ($3,963,730.75) $0.00         = = = = = = = =       ($8,347,898.25) $331,388.57       PVC PVB       NEG EFFECTS POS EFFECTS  Appendix O – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Visual Quality Specialist Report (Christensen 2015c)   Prepared by:  Dave A. Christensen Fishlake Forest Recreation Specialist  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 6, 2015             Executive Summary The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on the Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. The area affected by the proposal includes Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits.  This report considers potential effects to visual resources as a result of the no action and four action alternatives of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. Mechanical treatments would affect 5% to 11% of the project area. Prescribed fire would affect 15% to 19% of the project area. Stumps and burn piles would be noticeable as well as a charred landscape in the treated areas. Treatments would be completed in a mosaic pattern and would over time improve plant size, age and species diversity. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Stumps would be cut mostly flush with the ground. Tracked vehicles would be used for mechanical treatments and temporary roads would be reclaimed. The affects would quickly lessen as vegetation grows and would be the same or better than current conditions within three to five years. The Scenic Integrity Objective (SIO) designated as Moderate would remain slightly altered but still naturally appearing over time. Areas designated in the SIO of High would also be slightly altered yet would remain appearing unaltered over time. Based upon my findings, I conclude the action alternatives would move conditions closer to desired conditions in all measures evaluated. All of the action alternatives (including mechanical options 1 & 2) comply with the Forest Plan in that forest resource uses or activities would meet Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs) or in this case Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs). Burning and mechanical treatments will enhance aspen ecosystems and over time maintain or improve visual resources. No action would result in a much slower movement towards desired conditions and desired conditions would not be achieved in the foreseeable future. Visual resources would remain unchanged from the current condition. Introduction Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. Of these 175,706 acres, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres on Monroe Mountain. Soil survey information was used to estimate the historic occurrence of aspen. It is widely recognized that aspen ecosystems are capable of supporting one of the largest arrays of plant and animal species due to its high productivity and structural diversity. However, it is also widely recognized that aspen ecosystems have been in decline throughout the Intermountain West during the twentieth century. On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to, (1) conifer encroachment due to reduced fire, and (2) lack of recruitment due to domestic and wild browsing by cattle, sheep, elk, and deer. Absence of fire and overbrowsing has been identified by the District as the primary underlying causes for aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain being at risk. Aspen of 5 to 15 feet in height (“recruitment”) are uncommon on Monroe Mountain, despite continued sprouting of aspen (“regeneration”). Due to high cost and continual maintenance, fencing is not a long-term sustainable response option for protecting aspen sprouts from overbrowsing, and does not address underlying causes of the lack of recruitment.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain. Aspen ecosystems support the highest level of biodiversity for interior western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e. 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. Mechanical treatments can also be an effective disturbance tool for aspen restoration. Regulatory Framework  The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) states that it is the “continuing responsibility of the federal government to use all practicable means to assure for all Americans, aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings.” NEPA directs agencies to develop practicable methodologies for scenery management of “aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings.” It also requires “a systematic and interdisciplinary approach which will insure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental design arts into planning and decisionmaking which may have an impact on man’s environment.”  The National Forest Management Act of 1976 directs that the preservation of aesthetic values be analyzed at all planning levels.  Preliminary visual analysis was undertaken utilizing the 1974 Visual Management System (VMS) for portions of the Fishlake National Forest. However, a comprehensive visual quality inventory was never fully completed for subsequent approval and formal adoption.  The Forest Service has begun to use a newer (1995) Scenery Management System (SMS), which is in varying stages or processes of implementation throughout our National Forests. Under the Scenery Management System, Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs) are assigned to areas of the Forest by employing a systematic determination much as that used in establishing Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs) for the initial Visual Management System (VMS). These SIOs or levels of deviation from valued landscape character are clearly intended to flexibly serve as objectives or goals by which to more sustainably manage visual quality. The Fishlake National Forest has completed the inventory process of developing SIOs (both existing and desired condition) for all of the lands it manages. This determination for management of the scenery resource is consistent with any available visual inventories undertaken pursuant to the Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) (1986). Methodology for Analysis The methodology comes from the preliminary visual analysis using the 1974 Visual Management System (VMS) and the more current inventory process using the 1995 Scenery Management System (SMS). Resource Issues and Purpose and Need  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described below and in the EIS. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to:  • Improving and increasing the amount of habitat for wildlife species dependent upon aspen ecosystems (i.e., mule deer, elk, and Northern goshawk); • Improving and increasing the amount of habitat and forage for domestic ungulates (i.e., cattle and sheep); • Improving native species diversity; • Reducing hazardous fuel accumulations; • Reducing the risk for large-scale, intense wildland fires. This results in lower risk to the safety of the public and firefighters. This also results in lower risk to sensitive wildlife species (i.e. Northern goshawk, Western Boreal toad (Bufo boreas), and Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)); and, • Increasing the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (Utah Fire Plan 2001).  The interdisciplinary team reviewed the scoping comments from public individuals, interest groups, local governments, and other agencies, to develop a list of issues to address. The issues were separated into two groups: key and non-key issues. Key issues were defined as those directly or indirectly caused by implementing the proposed action. Non-key issues were identified as those: (1) Addressed through LRMP or implementation of LRMP standards and guidelines and best management practices; (2) Addressed through implementation of projectspecific mitigation measures/design criteria; (3) Addressed during processes or analyses routinely conducted by an interdisciplinary team; (4) Addressed through spatial location of activities during alternative design; (5) Beyond the scope of the project; or (6) general comment. The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA regulations explain these delineations in Sec. 1501.7, “…identify, and eliminate from detailed study the issues which are not significant or which have been covered by prior environmental review (Sec. 1506.3)…” A list of non-key issues and reasons regarding their categorization as non-significant is in the project record. Following are the key issues identified by the public and used to focus the analysis or drive alternative development.  Key Issues:  • Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation. • Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property. • Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced. • Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and Boreal toad habitat being severely degraded. • Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen sprouts post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. • Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (2 or more growing seasons). • Project activities may result in adverse impacts old growth characteristics. Overview of the Proposed Action The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues, and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments (see chapter 2 of the EIS for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative).  Addressing the reduced occurrence of wildland fire due to an increase in wildland fire suppression on Monroe Mountain is critical to the long-term restoration of aspen ecosystems. The average fire return intervals for each of the vegetation cover types occurring on Monroe Mountain can be found in chapter 1 of the EIS. This table also shows that the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer, thinning to a Basal Area of 90, and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch DBH, using group and singletree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years. This number is well within the Forest Service recommended range of area to treat within a 5-year period of 5,000 to 24,000 acres (see chapter 2 of the EIS for a detailed description of the proposed action and alternatives).  Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the alternative (see chapter 2 of the EIS for specific road locations, mileage, and specifications). In addition, temporary fencing would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (see chapter 2 of the EIS for fencing locations, mileage, and specifications).  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management). See chapter 2 of the EIS for a detailed description of the District’s proposal to address overbrowsing of aspen. Affected Environment Scenery is an important natural resource on the Monroe Mountain and, as is the case with other resources, must be cared for and managed for future generations. The scenic resource varies by location and is largely influenced by existing natural features including vegetation, water, landforms, and geology. It is primarily through their visual sense that most visitors perceive the Forest and its interrelated components. Scenic forest settings contribute much too recreational experiences. Benefits derived from scenic settings include identity, self-image of communities and individuals, and enhanced quality of life. Sight-seeing, driving for pleasure and outdoor photography are among the nation’s leading recreational activities and demand for them will continue. Scenic Integrity is a continuum ranging over five levels of integrity from very high to very low. Corresponding levels of existing scenic conditions and visual quality levels from the original Visual Management System have been crosswalked (see table 1 below) to assist in familiarity of understanding and comparative analysis.  The term Scenic Integrity Objective (SIO), or its counterpart, Visual Quality Objective (VQO) refers the degree of acceptable visual alteration of the landscape and is defined as a desired level of scenic excellence based on both physical and sociological characteristics of an area. Typically, more stringent SIOs or VQOs are incorporated to protect the most highly visible and frequently seen areas that have the greatest amount of variety in vegetation and other naturally occurring features.  Although inherently subjective, these long-term objectives or goals based on a large-scale visual inventory as defined in either the old Visual Management System (VMS) or the newer Scenery Management System (SMS) framework can facilitate the attainment of subtle, yet very important aesthetic goals, while balancing other equally important resource needs. For more information please refer the SIO and VQO crosswalk in Table 1.              Table 1: Scenic Integrity Objective (SIO) Visual Quality Objective (VQO) Crosswalk Scenic Integrity Objective - SIO Visual Quality Objective - VQO VERY HIGH scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character is intact with only minute if any deviations. The existing landscape character and sense of place is expressed at the highest possible level. (unaltered)  PRESERVATION. Allows for ecological changes only. Management activities, except for very low visual impact recreation facilities, are prohibited.  HIGH scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character appears intact. Deviations may be present but must repeat the form, line color, texture, and pattern common to the landscape character so completely and at such a scale that they are not evident. (appears unaltered) RETENTION. Management activities may only repeat the form, line, color, and texture frequently found in the characteristic landscape. Changes should not be evident to the casual forest visitor, and all retention activities to restore the area to a naturally appearing condition should be accomplished either during the operation or immediately after. (visitors to the Forest should not notice the management activity)  MODERATE scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character appears slightly altered. Noticeable deviations must remain visually subordinate to the landscape character being viewed. (slightly altered) PARTIAL RETENTION. Management activities remain visually subordinate to the characteristic landscape. Management activities should repeat form, line, color, or texture common to the characteristic landscape, but structures can introduce form, line, color, or texture that are found infrequently or not at all in the characteristic landscape. Reduction in form, line, color, and texture to meet Partial Retention should be accomplished as soon after project completion as possible, or at a minimum, within the first year. (any management activity must be blended into the landscape so as to attract little attention)  LOW refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character appears moderately altered. Deviations begin to dominate the valued landscape character being viewed but they borrow valued attributes such as size, shape, edge effect, and pattern of natural openings, vegetative type changes or architectural styles outside the landscape being viewed. They should not only appear as valued character outside the landscape being viewed but compatible or complimentary to the character within. (moderately altered) MODIFICATION. Management activities may visually dominate the original characteristic landscape. However, activities involving vegetative and landform alteration must borrow from naturally established form, line, color, or texture so completely and at such a scale that its visual characteristics are those of natural occurrences within the surrounding area or character type. Additional parts of these activities such as structures and roads must remain visually subordinate to the proposed composition. (this broad objective allows for most forms of management activity including those such as structures which are more visually obtrusive, provided they are designed to fit the context of the natural surroundings at all viewing distances)  VERY LOW refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character appears heavily altered. Deviations may strongly dominate the valued landscape character. They may not borrow from valued attributes such as size, shape, edge effect and pattern of natural openings, vegetative type changes or architectural styles outside the landscape being viewed. However deviations must be shaped and blended with the natural terrain (landforms) so that elements such as unnatural edges, roads, landings, and structures do not dominate the composition. (heavily altered) MAXIMUM MODIFICATION. Management activities of vegetative and landform alterations may dominate the characteristic landscape. However, when viewed as background, the visual characteristics must be those of natural occurrences within the surrounding area or character type. When viewed as foreground or middleground, they may not appear to completely borrow from naturally established form, line, color, or texture. Alterations may also be out of scale or contain detail, which is incongruent with natural occurrences as seen in foreground or middleground. (This yet broader objective is similar to Modification except that as with structures, vegetative and landform alterations can be obvious in foreground or middleground views. In background, however, these changes must fit aesthetically with the natural surroundings)   Additionally, it is helpful to define some related terms:  SEEN AREA. The total landscape area observed based upon landform screening. Seen areas may be divided into zones of immediate foreground, middleground, and background. Some landscapes are seldom seen by the public.  DISTANCE ZONES. Areas of landscapes (foreground, middleground, or background) denoted by specific distances from the observer. Used as a frame of reference in which to discuss landscape characteristics or activities of humans.  FOREGROUND. The detailed landscape typically found within zero to one-fourth through one-half mile of the observer.  MIDDLEGROUND. This is the space between the foreground and middleground in a viewed landscape. The area usually located one-fourth through one-half to three through five miles from the observer.  BACKGROUND. This is the distant part of a landscape or surroundings, especially that behind something that provides harmony or contrast. It is usually located three to five miles from the observer.  SCENIC INTEGRITY. This is a measure of the degree to which a landscape is visually perceived to be complete. In other words, it indicates the degree of intactness and wholeness of the landscape character. Human alterations can sometimes raise or maintain integrity. More often it is lowered depending on the degree of deviation from the character valued for its aesthetic appeal.  Management Direction in the Fishlake National Forest’s existing LRMP, when describing a desired condition to be achieved sometime in the future, states that Forest resource uses or activities should meet Visual Quality Objectives. And in further general direction, that reaching this goal is to be facilitated by applying the Visual Management System to all national Forest System lands.  Accordingly, preliminary visual analysis was undertaken utilizing the 1974 Visual Management System (VMS) for portions of the Fishlake National Forest. However, a comprehensive visual quality inventory was never fully completed for subsequent approval and formal adoption.  More recently, the Forest Service has begun to use a newer 1995 Scenery Management System (SMS), which is in varying stages or processes of implementation throughout our National Forests. This continually evolving SMS is designed to be more consistent with far-sighted ecosystem management principles in which societal influence plays a vital role. Under this newer Scenery Management System, Scenic Integrity Objectives are assigned to areas of the Forest by employing a systematic determination much as that used in establishing Visual Quality Objectives for the initial Visual Management System. Although these newer SIOs are similar in definition to earlier VQOs, their function or management use will differ. These new Scenic Integrity Objectives or levels of deviation from valued landscape character are clearly intended to flexibly serve as objectives or goals by which to more sustainably manage visual quality.  The Fishlake National Forest has completed the inventory process of developing SIOs (both existing and desired condition) for all of the lands it manages. This determination for management of the scenery resource is consistent with any available visual inventories undertaken pursuant to the Fishlake National Forest LRMP (1986).  Generally, the existing condition of the present scenery on the Monroe Mountain is in pretty good shape when collectively comparing how natural it appears to the amount and types of human alterations present. Although, in parts of the mountain, evidence of human modification in the form of vegetative manipulation (e.g., fuel treatment) or development (e.g., structures, roads, trails, fences and gates) can be apparent. These man-made elements are not typically perceived by the casual Forest visitor to be visually dominant. In other words, relative to overall scenic integrity, the Monroe Mountain landscape has a reasonably high degree of intactness.  Particularly when viewed from the perspective of Forest-wide scale, the SIOs as assigned on the Draft Scenic Integrity Map (Map 1), which would serve as parameters for future management of this visual resource, are not noticeably different in degree of change or alteration from the existing condition. The project area (Monroe Mountain) is mapped in the SIOs of about 65% Moderate and 35% High.  Visual sensitivity usually varies along any travel corridor. The project area is viewed in the foreground and middleground from the main Monroe Mountain Road #068, Monroe Canyon Road #078, Manning Meadows Road #083, Big Flat Road #070, Dry Creek Road #071 and Pole Canyon Road #072. The project area is viewed mostly in the background from Interstate 70, Highway 24 and State Road 62.  Views from areas of concentrated recreation use (both dispersed and developed) outside of these travel corridors are also important to those who may be fishing, camping, riding or hiking on scenic trails or enjoying the view from their cabin window. Sites of this type are near Big Lake, Koosharem Guard Station, Monrovian Park, and Manning Meadows. Views of the Forest from adjacent communities such as Richfield, Annabella, Monroe, Marysvale, Koosharem and Greenwich also need to be considered.  In summary, viewsheds associated with nearby communities, important tourist destinations, welltraveled roads and popular recreation trails, and recreation sites can have high visual value. Forest System lands on the Monroe Mountain are characterized by spacious mountainous terrain and include beautiful landscapes, panoramic ridge and valley views (some with lakes or reservoirs), and abundant wildlife viewing opportunities; resulting in very diverse, yet accessible scenery.  It should be noted that in the short term there may be needed activities or resource uses that produce impacts not meeting planned SIOs, yet through appropriate mitigation/design criteria can remain reasonable in effect and may even facilitate a higher level of scenic quality in the long term. This is congruent with the primary context of the newer Scenery Management System which is designed to be consistent with more far-sighted ecosystem management principles and provide for balance in managing all Forest resources. SIO definitions of High and Moderate are given to help with understanding the current draft Scenic Integrity Objectives shown on Map 1.  HIGH scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character appears intact. Deviations may be present but must repeat the form, line color, texture, and pattern common to the landscape character so completely and at such a scale that they are not evident. (appears unaltered)  MODERATE scenic integrity refers to landscapes where the valued landscape character appears slightly altered. Noticeable deviations must remain visually subordinate to the landscape character being viewed. (slightly altered) Map 1: Monroe Mountain Current Draft Scenic Integrity Objectives    Table 2: Affects to Scenic Integrity by Alternative  No Action  Alternative 1  Alternative 2  Alternative 3  Alternative 4  Alternative 5 Mechanical Treatments 0 acres of mechanical treatment 8,186 acres of mechanical treatments with slash burning or 5% of the project area. 13,647 acres of mechanical treatments with slash burning or 8% of the project area. 19,838 acres of mechanical treatments with slash burning or 11% of the project area. 15,072 acres of mechanical treatments with slash burning or 9% of the project area. Prescribed Fire 0 acres of prescribed burn 32,991 acres of prescribed burn with mixed burn severities or 19% of the project area. 31,357 acres of prescribed burn with mixed burn severities or 18% of the project area. 27,436 acres of prescribed burn with mixed burn severities or 16% of the project area. 26,453 acres of prescribed burn with mixed burn severities or 15% of the project area. Other Information No mechanical treatments or prescribed fire are proposed. Only wildfire would occur; with the potential for large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land Stumps and burn piles would be noticeable as well as a charred landscape. Treatments would be completed in a mosaic pattern and would improve plant size, age and species diversity. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used for mechanical treatments and temporary roads would be reclaimed. The affects would quickly lessen as vegetation grows and would be the same or better than current conditions within 3 to 5 years. See Specialist reports. Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs) The Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs) would remain the same. The Scenic Integrity Objective (SIO) in Moderate would remain slightly altered but still naturally appearing over time. In High the SIO would also be slightly altered yet would remain appearing unaltered over time. Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives Past, present and reasonable foreseeable actions (See EIS for a list of the actions) on the Monroe Mountain were reviewed to determine the cumulative effects to visual resources. Impacts from natural events, human activities, and forest management activities have created the current Scenic Integrity Objectives of High and Moderate. Implementation of the action alternatives and reasonably foreseeable actions would not permanently lower the current visual resources (SIOs). Desired Condition The desired condition as stated in the Forest Plan is that Forest resource uses or activities would meet Visual Quality Objectives. Therefore, visual resources on the Monroe Mountain would maintain or improve the existing situation of being either slightly altered (Moderate) or appearing unaltered (High). Burning and mechanical treatments would enhance aspen ecosystems and over time maintain or possibly improve visual resources. Conclusions This report considers how mechanical treatments and prescribed fire would affect visual resources, now and in the future. This would apply to the four action alternatives. Mechanical treatments would affect 5% to 11% of the project area. Prescribed fire would affect 15% to 19% of the project area. Stumps and burn piles would be noticeable as well as a charred landscape in the treated areas. Treatments would be completed in a mosaic pattern and would over time improve plant size, age and species diversity. Fire breaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Trees would be cut as close to the ground as possible. Tracked vehicles would be used for mechanical treatments and temporary roads would be reclaimed. The affects would quickly lessen as vegetation grows and would be the same or better than current conditions within three to five years. The Scenic Integrity Objective (SIO) designated as Moderate would remain slightly altered but still naturally appearing over time. Areas designated in the SIO of High would also be slightly altered yet would remain appearing unaltered over time. Based upon my findings, I conclude the action alternatives (including mechanical options 1 & 2) would move conditions closer to desired conditions in all measures evaluated. All of the action alternatives comply with the Forest Plan in that forest resource uses or activities should meet Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs) or in this case Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs). Burning and mechanical treatments will enhance aspen ecosystems and over time maintain or improve visual resources. No action would result in a much slower movement towards desired conditions and desired conditions would not be achieved in the foreseeable future. Visual resources would remain unchanged from the current condition. Compliance with the Forest Plan and Other Regulatory Direction  A comprehensive visual quality inventory was never fully completed for subsequent approval and formal adoption in the Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan. The Fishlake National Forest has completed the inventory process of developing SIOs (both existing and desired condition) for all of the lands it manages. This determination for management of the scenery resource is consistent with any available visual inventories undertaken pursuant to the Fishlake National Forest LRMP (1986). All of the action alternatives comply with the Forest Plan in that forest resource uses or activities should meet Visual Quality Objectives (VQOs) or in this case Scenic Integrity Objectives (SIOs).  As described in chapter 1 of the EIS, the desired conditions and the purpose and need for this project are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in chapter IV of the Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP), and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). The District has also compared the action alternatives with the general direction and the standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP to determine compliance, and found that the action alternatives are compliant with the LRMP. This review, along with supporting rationale is found in the project record. Literature Cited USDA, Forest Service, 1974, National Forest Landscape Management, Volume 2, Chapter 1, Agriculture Handbook 462, Washington DC USDA, Forest Service, 1986, Land and Resource Management Plan for the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. USDA, Forest Service, 1995, Landscape Aesthetics: A Handbook for Scenery Management, Agriculture Handbook 701, Washington DC Appendix P – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Wildlife Specialist Report (Rasmussen 2015)    Prepared by:  Kreig Rasmussen Fishlake Forest Wildlife Biologist  For:  Richfield Ranger District Fishlake National Forest  June 27, 2015            Introduction This wildlife report for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project will present an introduction to the project area, proposed treatment actions, differences in non-action and action alternatives, wildlife species listed as Threatened, Endangered, Sensitive, Candidate, Management Indicator Species, and whether there are issues that warrant further analysis. Analysis for species will result in a final determination of “affect” or “no affect” with the appropriate determination of protection or mitigation to the species and/or their associated habitat.  Proposed Actions and Affected Environment  Seral and Stable Aspen Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are two mechanical treatment options being considered in this analysis for seral and stable aspen stands (Photos 1 to 9; Appendix A in EIS) (Tables 1 & 2):  1. This option would occur throughout the project area. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photos 2, 5 and 8; Appendix A in EIS). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (photos 3, 6 and 9; Appendix A in EIS). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for seral and stable aspen.  Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are also two mechanical treatments options being considered in this analysis for spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands (photos 10 thru 18; Appendix A in EIS) (Tables 1 & 2): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed by salvage while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed (sanitation) while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris. In areas of spruce/fir where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce may occur. The remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a basal area (BA) of 90 with single and group tree selection. If no beetle killed or infested trees are present initially, trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection (photos 11, 14, and 17; Appendix A in EIS). 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (photos 12, 15 and 18; Appendix A in EIS). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer.  Table 1: Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 3,146 Stable Aspen 4,025 Spruce/Fir 918 Mixed Conifer 97 Total 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 6,422 Stable Aspen 4,780 Spruce/Fir 2,355 Mixed Conifer 91 Total 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 9,492 Stable Aspen 6,130 Spruce/Fir 4,113 Mixed Conifer 102 Total 19,837 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 6,736 Stable Aspen 5,340 Spruce/Fir 2,905 Mixed Conifer 92 Total 15,073    Table 2: Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 2,349 797 3,146 Stable Aspen 3,643 382 4,025 Spruce/Fir 472 446 918 Mixed Conifer 89 8 97 Total 6,553 1,633 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 3,111 3,311 6,422 Stable Aspen 3,965 815 4,780 Spruce/Fir 835 1,520 2,355 Mixed Conifer 90 1 91 Total 8,001 5,647 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 3,991 5,501 9,492 Stable Aspen 4,196 1,934 6,130 Spruce/Fir 1,186 2,927 4,113 Mixed Conifer 91 11 102 Total 9,464 10,373 19,837 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 2,547 4,189 6,736 Stable Aspen 3,830 1,510 5,340 Spruce/Fir 984 1,921 2,905 Mixed Conifer 91 1 92 Total 7,452 7,621 15,073  Proposed Prescribed Fire Treatments  Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. To maintain LRMP compliance, prescribed fire would occur when 60 percent of the area would be expected to burn (Table 3).  Mechanical treatments and prescribed fire are the tools of choice for this proposed project. Each treatment will affect wildlife species in different ways. In some cases it will be beneficial short term and long-term while in other cases impacts that affect wildlife populations in the short term will benefit them in the long-term. Mechanical treatments can be applied surgically on the ground to meet habitat objectives and design feature criteria. Prescribed fire has the potential to meet many of the same goals and objectives; however, it carries with it the inherit risk of escape from planned boundaries thus changing the effects to habitat features and wildlife impacts. Options 1 and 2 have differences in acres treated according to the current condition of the stands or within boundaries of roadless designation or consideration. The impacts and effects to avian and mammalian species will be relative to the amount of acres treated in each scenario. The analysis by species that follows in this document will look at the effects to each species of concern recognized by the U.S. Forest Service Region 4 and/or the Fishlake National Forest.  Table 3: Proposed prescribed fire treatments  Existing Vegetation Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 7,991 4,795 Spruce-Fir 5,658 3,395 Mixed Conifer 4,183 2,510 Total 32,991 19,795 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 14,318 8,591 Stable Aspen 7,861 4,716 Spruce-Fir 4,988 2,993 Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Total 31,357 18,814 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,693 4,016 Spruce-Fir 3,802 2,281 Mixed Conifer 4,178 2,507 Total 27,436 16,462 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 11,676 7,006 Stable Aspen 6,777 4,066 Spruce-Fir 3,810 2,286 Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Total 26,453 15,872  Species Addressed  Threatened, Endangered, and Candidate species potentially occurring in the project area were identified through a review of the March 2013 species list. Forest Service Intermountain Region Sensitive Species potentially occurring in the project area were obtained from the most recent Regional Forester’s list (Regional Forester’s Sensitive Species List 2013). Table 4 provides a comprehensive list of Federally-listed, Sensitive Species, Management Indicator Species and Candidate species on the Fishlake National Forest and identifies species carried forward in the analysis based on known occurrences or the presence of suitable habitat in the project area.    Table 4: List of Threatened (T), Endangered (E), Sensitive (S), Management Indicator Species (MIS) and Candidate (C) Species. SPECIES Scientific Name   STATUS SUITABLE HABITAT HABITAT UNSUITABILITY BASED ON: SPECIES  TO BE ANALYZED FURTHER Y OR N  Utah Prairie Dog Cynomys parvidens   T  No  Short-grass prairie type preferred by prairie dogs does not occur in the project area. No prairie dog colonies  No California Condor (4) Gymnogyps californianus   E  No  Project area lacks the rock cliff habitat preferred by California condors. Trees are present for perching.  Yes Bighorn Sheep Ovis Canadensis S No Contiguous acres of cliff face habitat lacking. No Bald Eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus  S  Yes  Bald eagles migrate to the project area during the winter (Nov-Mar). Habitat used by eagles is found in the project area, but individuals are only present during the winter months only.  Yes  Northern Goshawk Accipiter gentilis  Sensitive, MIS & Migratory Bird Species  Yes  Spruce, mixed conifer and aspen dominated stands containing variable sized mid-aged to mature trees that are near a permanent water source is found in the project area.  Yes Pygmy Rabbit S No Tall, dense sagebrush habitat below 8500 feet elevation is not No Brachylagus idahoensis present within the project area. Greater Sage Grouse Centrocercus urophasianus S Yes Suitable Sage grouse habitat is found in the analysis area. Sagebrush is not a targeted vegetation species for treatment in this project. Yes Townsend’s Big-eared Bat Corynorhinus townsendii S Yes Streams, springs, bogs, and lake foraging habitat is found in the project area. Yes Spotted Bat Euderma maculatum S Yes Sagebrush, wetlands, and forested foraging habitat are found in the project area. Yes Peregrine Falcon Falco peregrinus anatum Sensitive & Migratory Bird Species No The project area doesn’t contain the steep cliffs and rocky ledges needed for nesting or the open country for foraging. No Three-toed woodpecker Picoides tridactylus S Yes Forested areas used by Three-toed woodpecker are mainly mature spruce forested areas. Spruce forested areas occur in the project area. Yes Flammulated Owl Otus flammeolus S Yes Forested acres used by Flammulated owls on Monroe Mt. are Douglas fir/spruce mix. The project area contains a scattered Douglas fir component. Yes  Rocky Mountain Elk Cervus elaphus  MIS  Yes  Diverse cover and forage components create ideal summer and transition range for elk within the proposed project boundary.  Yes  Mule Deer Odocolius  MIS  Yes  Diverse cover and forage components create ideal summer  Yes hemionus  and transition range for deer within the proposed project boundary.  Hairy Woodpecker Western Bluebird Mountain Bluebird Williamson’s sapsucker  MIS (Fishlake NF Cavity Nester Group)  Yes  Forested areas containing conifer, mixed conifer and aspen offer cavity making and nesting opportunity within the project area.  Yes  Lincoln’s Sparrow Yellow Warbler MacGillivray’s Warbler Song Sparrow  MIS (Fishlake NF Riparian Group)  Yes  Riparian, lakes, streams, seeps and bogs exist within the project area. This creates riparian habitat for this selected group.  Yes  Brewer’s Sparrow Sage Thrasher Vesper Sparrow  MIS (Fishlake NF Sage Nester Group)  Yes  Acres of sagebrush habitat are found within the CEA but not the proposed forested treatment areas. Traffic associated with the proposed project would pass through suitable sage nester habitat.  Yes  Migratory Birds  MIS  Yes  A diverse variety of habitat for migratory birds exists throughout the project area. Grasses, mountain brush, aspen, mixed conifer and conifer host a variety of migratory birds in the project area.  Yes  Yellow-billed Cuckoo  C  No  Riparian habitat of cottonwood and willow below 6500 feet are not found within the project area.  No  T=Threatened, E=Endangered, S=Sensitive, C=Candidate, MIS=Management Indicator Species. Assessment Methodology  The techniques and methodologies used in this analysis are considered the best available science. The analysis includes a summary of the credible scientific evidence which is relevant to evaluating reasonably foreseeable impacts. The analysis also identifies methods used and references scientific sources relied on. The conclusions are based on the scientific analysis that shows a thorough review of relevant scientific information, and the acknowledgment of incomplete or unavailable information, scientific uncertainty, and risk.  The elements of science used are:  • On-site data and history. District records and the corporate GIS database were reviewed for sightings and potentially suitable habitat for select Sensitive and MIS species. • Elk: Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR), United States Forest Service (USFS), and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) have conducted a cooperative effort to gather data for elk populations on Monroe Mountain. Elk trend data has been gathered for the unit by ground transects and aerial census. Vehicle (ground transects) are conducted annually and the aerial census is conducted on an every 3 year rotation (in project record). Aerial census is accomplished with a helicopter using an intensive search method on winter range areas. The UDWR has made a conscience effort to invite livestock permittees, sportsman representatives, county commissioners, USFS, BLM, private land owners, etc. on the flights to witness the methodology of the flight census. GPS records of flight paths and observation points are recorded and final data are entered into a database. Data from each flight are entered into UDWR’s population model to determine an estimated population for the unit. These data are used to determine population goals for the unit that include measures to comply with the cooperative Monroe Mountain Elk Plan as well has hunt strategies. Knowledge of seasonal elk use and migration patterns have been established through a telemetry study conducted in the early 90s. Current data is being gathered via telemetry from elk that share the Dutton and Monroe units. • Deer: UDWR, USFS, and BLM have conducted a cooperative effort to gather data for deer populations on Monroe Mountain. Deer trend data has been gathered on an annual basis by vehicle transect method cooperatively since the early 80s. Data prior to the early 80s was gathered by UDWR. Data is gathered post hunting season and during the rut period for deer (Greenwood 2014). This method allows a full representation of deer in the population in a given area because bucks of all ages are involved in the rutting part of the life cycle for deer. Transects were established on winter and transition range routes around the Monroe Mountain unit. Data is recorded and used for planning various population dynamics. The data are used to determine population goals for the unit that include measures to comply with the cooperative Monroe Mountain Deer Plan as well has hunt strategies. Currently, an intensive deer-predation study is being conducted on Monroe Mountain to help managers better understand the role of predators on yearling does and newly born fawns. The study is a cooperative effort between Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR), Brigham Young University (BYU), Utah State University (USU), United States Forest Service (USFS), Bureau of Land Management (BLM), volunteers, conservation groups, and others. • Goshawk— a variety of methods have been used to search for and locate Northern Goshawk Territories on the Richfield Ranger District. Methods have included Region 4 protocol goshawk surveys for proposed projects, aerial helicopter surveys in suitable habitat (winter months), monitoring existing territories annually, and reporting of nests randomly located by public or survey contractors for other projects. Known nest and alternate nests have been GPS recorded and GIS mapped. Territorial boundaries were established by the District Wildlife Biologist working with the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) shop. Boundaries are drawn according to aerial photo maps using best judgment of forested areas around the nest areas that may be used by goshawk adults and their young. These boundaries are in no way absolute but are a good representation of suitable territorial habitat. As alternate nests and new territories are found the GIS data base and District wildlife data base records are updated at the end of each field season. • Neo-tropical migratory birds—Data gathering for avian species were accomplished through walking and driving transect. Established routes have been surveyed on a regular basis since the Burnt Flat Analysis Project (BFAP) was proposed in 1993 (Monroe Mountain). Random point bird counts were established as well for the BFAP. Bird data are also collected along general wildlife survey routes as well as during protocol goshawk survey routes. Avian data were gathered by well experienced birders working for the Richfield Ranger District (RRD). • Flammulated Owl—Data gathered for Flammulated owl was established throughout the project area on designated routes in suitable habitat. Night surveys during the early summer months using protocol calling methods helped establish a presence of owls and a preferred habitat type on Monroe Mountain. Data points of call responses were GPS recorded and entered into GIS for future analysis. Areas of preferred habitat have been noted and a GIS data base is being established to reference preferred habitat by Flammulated owls. • Three-toed Woodpecker-- Bird data were collected along general wildlife survey routes as well as during protocol goshawk routes in proposed treatment units. This species was identified and documented as well as its preferred habitat type (Hill 2002). Through years of survey work in the spruce zone on Monroe Mountain we have seen an increase of Three-toed woodpecker use during a spruce bark beetle outbreak. Three-toed woodpeckers continue to remain in the beetle ravaged areas. • Bats—Bat data were collected with an electronic “Anabat” device. Data was recorded in the proposed project area. Data was retrieved and analyzed at the end of the 2014 field season. • Scientific literature. Literature reviewed and cited is listed in the Literature Citations section and included within the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008). • Professional knowledge, judgment and experience. The primary specialist that conducted this analysis was Kreig Rasmussen, Richfield Ranger District Wildlife Biologist (23 years). Expert birder, Richard Wilkinson has worked summers for approximately 20 years to survey and record bird species around the Richfield Ranger District. Other wildlife technicians have worked several consecutive years on the RRD and helped enhance the collective database. The collective professional knowledge of the project area, judgment of how to integrate science with local conditions and the experience gained from implementation of other projects have been incorporated into the analysis.  Vegetation Classification and the Size-Density Model  Stand exams were conducted in the proposed project area to gather forest data such as, canopy, tree species, tree size, tree density, snags, down woody debris, Vegetation Structural Stages (VSS) and other information. Approximately ten percent of the entire grouping of stands were examined and represent the proposed project as a whole. The Forester for the Richfield Ranger District has conducted random stand exam data throughout the project area and has analyzed the data. He provides the following narrative that describes the current average VSS class of the project area, future potential and prospective responses to treatment options in the proposed treatment areas.  Table 5: Current and Desired Vegetative Structural Stages (VSS) for Aspen, Mixed Conifer and Spruce/Fir Stands.   VSS 1: Grass-Forb/Shrub  (DBH: 0-1 inch) VSS 2: Seedling-Sapling (DBH: 1-5 inches") VSS 3: Young Forest (DBH: 5-12 inches)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Stable Stands 19% 24% 22% 6% 36% 23% 40% 63% 50% Aspen: Seral Stands 0% 18% 13% 5% 47% 15% 37% 82% 58% Mixed Conifer Stands 8% 17% 13% 5% 37% 20% 24% 52% 42% Spruce/Fir Stands 4% 20% 13% 7% 26% 16% 23% 63% 41% Desired Condition All Stands **** **** 10% **** **** 10% **** **** 20%              VSS 4: Mid-Aged Forest (DBH: 12-18 inches) VSS 5: Mature Forest (DBH: 18-24 inches) VSS 6: Old Forest (DBH: 24 plus inches)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Stable Stands 0% 11% 5% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Aspen: Seral Stands 0% 32% 13% 0% 5% 1% 0% 5% 0% Mixed Conifer Stands 6% 43% 19% 2% 6% 4% 0% 5% 2% Spruce/Fir Stands 4% 31% 21% 0% 14% 6% 0% 13% 2% Desired Condition All Stands **** **** 20% **** **** 20% **** **** 20%  The VSS as it is applied to Monroe Mountain describes the project area as being primarily in VSS 1, 2, and 3, while the desired condition for stable and seral aspen, mixed conifer and spruce/fir stands for VSS 4, 5, and 6 are not being achieved.  Analysis Area  The area analyzed for direct and indirect effects to TES wildlife species includes the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir areas described in the range of alternatives (1-5) (Figure 1). The survey area includes the areas described in the range of alternatives (1-5). The project Analysis Area (AA) used for this wildlife report is the cumulative acres of forested vegetation found on Monroe Mountain that covers the range of alternatives and is 67,750 acres (Figure 1 and Figure 5). The cumulative effects area (CEA) for this project has been determined to be lands within the Monroe Mountain forest boundary (175,706 acres, see section 5). Since wildlife respect no  Project Area MapFigure 1: Project Vicinity Map   human imposed boundaries, private land, and any state lands will be included in the total acreage of the CEA.  Project Area, Background and Historic Conditions  Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, east of Marysvale and north east of Circleville, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings.  Of these 175,706 acres, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres on Monroe Mountain (Figure 2). Soil survey information was used to estimate the historic occurrence of aspen. It is widely recognized that aspen ecosystems are capable of supporting one of the largest arrays of plant and animal species due to its high productivity and structural diversity. However, it is also widely recognized that aspen ecosystems have been in decline throughout the Intermountain West during the 20th century (UFRWG 2010).  On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to,  1. On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to, Conifer encroachment due to a reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily because of an increase in wildland fire suppression; and, 2. Lack of aspen recruitment due to domestic and wild browsing by cattle, sheep, elk, and deer.  Reduced occurrences of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and overbrowsing by domestic and wild browsers have been identified by the District as the primary underlying causes for aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain being at risk. Aspen of 5 to 15 feet in height (“recruitment”) are uncommon on Monroe Mountain, despite continued sprouting of aspen (“regeneration”). Due to high cost and continual maintenance, fencing is not a long-term sustainable response option for protecting aspen sprouts from overbrowsing, and does not address underlying causes of the lack of recruitment.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain. Aspen ecosystems support the highest level of biodiversity for interior western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e. 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. Mechanical treatments are an effective disturbance tool for aspen restoration.  One of the main concerns that currently exist on Monroe Mountain is the quantity of grazing and browsing ungulates and the carrying capacity of forage available. The success of an aspen restoration project on Monroe Mountain would be relative to the amount of ungulate use on the regeneration of aspen following treatments. Ungulates of concern are cattle, sheep, deer and elk.  Few records exist indicating the number of mule deer (Odocolius hemionus) that were present on Monroe Mountain prior to the 1930s. Deer Animal Use Months (AUMs) in Figure 3 and Table 6 are rough estimates between the 1930s and 1970s.  Figure 2: Monroe Mountain historic (200-400 years ago) vegetation distribution  With the exception of 2000 and 2014, deer AUMs have gradually decreased from the 1960s through 2010. Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus) AUMs have steadily increased from the 1970s through 2000, then had a reduction in 2010, and then a slight increase in 2014. Winter counts were used to calculate elk AUMs; therefore, actual summer elk AUMs may be higher than what is displayed in Figure 3 and Table 6, assuming summer elk numbers are higher than winter elk numbers on Monroe Mountain. For example, the UDWR knows a portion of the elk herd that summer on Monroe Mountain leave the mountain during the winter months and utilize winter ranges on adjoining units. Although Figure 3 and Table 6 shows total AUMs in 2014 are similar to total AUMs in 1910, the 1910 AUMs displayed in Figure 3 and Table 6 are likely conservative because mule deer AUMs are not included. In 1910, the AUMs were cattle, sheep, and an unknown number of mule deer, while in 2014 the AUMs were cattle, sheep, deer, and elk. All of these species browse aspen.  Existing Vegetation on Monroe Mountain/Description of Project Area (Figures 4 & 5) • Aspen-dominated cover (stable aspen) currently occurs on approximately 17,009 acres. Much of this stable aspen has a component of mixed conifer in the understory (primarily subalpine fir). • Approximately 31,129 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by seral aspen. Much of this seral aspen co-exists with mixed conifer (primarily subalpine fir).  Figure 3: Summary of elk, mule deer, cattle, and sheep Animal Unit Months (AUMs) since the early 1900s. Deer AUMs are unknown for 1910 and 1920.  Year Sheep AUMs Cattle AUMs Mule Deer AUMs Elk AUMs 1910 8,513 14,851 Not Surveyed Not Surveyed 1920 7,501 14,020 Not Surveyed Not Surveyed 1930 6,373 5,887 3,685 Not Surveyed 1940 5,446 4,664 8,597 Not Surveyed 1950 2,935 6,126 8,597 Not Surveyed 1960 3,424 4,754 21,016 Not Surveyed 1970 2,584 5,186 16,785 257 1980 2,124 6,877 12,145 2,573 1990 2,121 6,458 9,143 5,146 2000 1,763 7,731 10,781 9,133 2010 1,780 7,750 6,687 5,403 2014 1,930 7,086 9,146 6,301 Table 6: Summary of elk, mule deer, cattle, and sheep Animal Unit Months (AUMs) since the early 1910s. This table correlates with Figure 3 above.  • Approximately 5,210 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by mixed conifer (Engelmann spruce, Douglas fir, Spruce fir, Ponderosa pine and White fir). Some of this mixed conifer co-exists with aspen. • Approximately 13,667 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by spruce/fir. Some of this spruce/fir co-exists with aspen. • Approximately 43,887 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by sagebrush cover types (primarily mountain big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata)), some (approximately 12,231 acres) of which may have been aspen communities in the recent past. These 12,231 acres still have scattered aspen trees/stands in portions of the sagebrush communities. • The project area overlaps Fishlake Forest Plan Management Areas: 5A – Big Game Winter Range-Non-Forested, 4A – Fish Habitat Improvement, 4B – Habitat for Management Indicator Species, 9F – Improved Watershed, 6B – Intensive Livestock Management, 2B – Rural+Roaded Natural Recreation and 7B – Wood Fiber Products-Thru Genetics.   Figure 4: Monroe Mountain existing vegetation distribution  The desired condition as outlined in this document is specific to Monroe Mountain and was developed by the District; it is consistent with the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP; USFS 1986). The desired condition is to have persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems (as described in Table 6) and adequate recruitment to perpetuate aspen communities, including site-appropriate, bio-diverse understories. Big sagebrush, if present would be a minor component of the aspen community. Fire regimes would be adequate to perpetuate aspen, particularly in areas seral to conifer. Table 6 describes the current and desired aspen stand structure for areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer.   Figure 5: Existing Vegetation on Monroe Mountain    Table 6: Current and desired aspen stand structure in areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer   Aspen Sprouts/Acre (<6 feet in height) Aspen Saplings/Acre (6-12 feet in height) Aspen Recruits/Acre (>12 feet in height)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Seral Stands 0 3,286 592 0 911 119 59 615 276 Spruce/Fir Stands 0 4,433 1,121 0 183 38 0 301 137 Mixed Conifer Stands 0 1,255 677 0 233 108 0 286 117 Desired Condition38 Aspen Structure After Implementation of Mechanical and/or Prescribed Fire Treatments 5,000 No Max 10,000 to 20,000 1,000 No Max 1,000 to 2,000 400 No Max 400 to 600 38 These numbers demonstrate that the desired condition of having aspen communities with multi-height stems with adequate recruitment to prepetuate the aspen communities are being met.  The range of Alternatives are 1-5, with Alternative 1 being the No Action Alternative.  Wildlife Species Discussion  The intent of this project is to create age class diversity in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain and create a more sustainable aspen landscape over time. Implementation of this project will increase habitat effectiveness for some wildlife species and decreases in habitat effectiveness for others. Monroe Mountain is changing as the landscape is converting to a more mid to late serial community landscape and it is becoming more of a monotypic landscape. Climatic succession in forest species dominates the mountain due to the lack of disturbance. This current condition has restricted the biodiversity that should normally exist among a proper functioning landscape. Diversity of wildlife species is not as broad as in more vegetatively diverse landscapes. As vegetation treatments have been implemented across the landscape in past years and diverse mosaic patterns of treated lands introduced into the older vegetation systems, young healthy early succession vegetation has been documented as it has enhanced the diversity in plant and animal life. This project will help introduce species diversity back into the Monroe Mountain area. A mosaic design is part of the implementation strategy to create a pattern of treated and un-treated acres that will create an increase of biodiversity. Habitat fragmentation should not be an issue for wildlife as care has been taken to have leave areas, old growth areas and treatment areas in good juxtaposition across the landscape to promote species diversity. Like all vegetation management treatments, those species that favor early serial communities and early serial vegetation species will benefit while other species that require late serial will be impacted. This project will provide increases in habitat effectiveness and benefit species such as ungulates, and decrease habitat effectiveness for species such as owls and goshawks that are more closely related to more mature conditions. Mosaic patterns created by the project will distribute ungulate herbivory across the landscape minimizing overuse to current key areas and allow newly treated areas to have favorable responses to treatments. Temporary roads will be closed and rehabilitated in an attempt to eliminate motorized use of these areas in the future. There will be some short-term (3-5 years) impacts to plant and animal uses of these areas during the implementation phase of the project, however, the overall outcome will provide much needed plant species diversity across the landscape that will last well into the future.  Table 7: Summary of Alternatives. Summary of Alternatives  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 1 **** 0 0 0 Alternative 2 Mixed Conifer 97 4,183 2,510 Seral Aspen 3,146 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 4,025 7,991 4,795 Spruce-Fir 918 5,658 3,395 Total 8,186 32,991 19,795 Alternative 3 Mixed Conifer 91 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen 6,422 14,318 8,591 Stable Aspen 4,780 7,861 4,716 Spruce-Fir 2,355 4,988 2,993 Total 13,647 31,357 18,814 Alternative 4 Mixed Conifer 102 4,178 2,507 Seral Aspen 9,492 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,130 6,693 4,016 Spruce-Fir 4,113 3,802 2,281 Total 19,838 27,436 16,462 Alternative 5 Mixed Conifer 91 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen 6,736 11,676 7,006 Stable Aspen 5,340 6,777 4,066 Spruce-Fir 2,905 3,810 2,286 Total 15,072 26,453 15,872      Threatened and Endangered Species (T&E)  Threatened and Endangered species or suitable habitat for this project pertains only to the California condor. Other T and E species were presented and dismissed for further analysis in Table 4 (List of Threatened, Endangered, Sensitive, MIS and Candidate Species).  Utah Prairie Dog (Cynomys parvidens) and California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus)  Utah Prairie Dog (Cynomys parvidens)  As stated above (Table 4), the project area lacks the suitable habitat needed for this species.  California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Implementation of the proposed action (mechanical and prescribed fire) would alter vegetation from the all action alternatives. These impacts would result in a decrease in some trees (live and dead) that condors could perch on; however, fire would also be creating more standing dead trees and open up some of the landscape for foraging. It is expected that opening parts of this landscape would increase the potential for condors to find and scavenge on carrion. The increased source of carrion would offset the reductions of potential perching habitat. In addition, the landscape provides abundant perching opportunities. These effects would displace condor use from one area to another within the same landscape as this landscape provides excellent perching habitat, and the proposed action will increase foraging potential. An indirect impact of this action that may result in more available food would be that with more openings, deer and elk hunter access could increase. With increased hunter success more potential for food could be available throughout the landscape.  This project lies south of I-70 and is therefore within the 10j experimental non-essential area for the California condor. The project area lacks the abundance of rock cliff habitat needed by this species; however, the area does contain large trees for perching. There have been no sightings at the present time or historical of this species on Monroe Mountain. Since this species does not utilize Monroe Mountain for any of it’s life cyle (based on current knowledge) the writer of this document would determine the proposed project would have minimal to no affect on individuals or the viablitly of the species.  Utah Prairie dog and California condor will also be covered in the Biological Assessment.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no changes to the habitat quality and quantity other than those created by nature events such as from fire, wind events and insect killed open areas. Because no California condor has been documented to occur on the Richfield Ranger District impacts from the No Action would be negligible and difficult to detect.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under the No Action Alternative, direct adverse effects would not occur. Any effect discussed in this section may only occur if condor populations spread north and developed on the Forest. However, potential indirect effects may eventually occur from natural succession events as the area moves from early/mid serial species to late seral communities. With this change their would be an increase in roosting and perching habitat with decreases in foraging habitat other than those foraging areas associated with roads and road kill mammals. This would not likely decrease suitable habitat effectiveness to a degree that would be detectable. As succession progresses the quality of condor habitat over time would change as prey species associated with early serial species and dominated landscape would change as conifer species die. Conversely, as more aspen dominated landscapes are converted over time into more conifer dominated landscapes the diversity of prey species would change but only slightly as the primary species that condors are feeding upon use both aspen and conifer dominated landscapes.  The areas dominated by conifer would remain susceptible to large wildfire events. If a wildfire occurred it is likely that the intensity of the burn could not be managed and an added decrease in habitat effectiveness would occur to peraching and roosting habitat. This is because the wildfire would probably occur in the summertime when the acreage would be larger, without a mosaic pattern, and the severity would be higher with plant recovery and re-establishment extended over a longer period of time.  If the No Action Alternative was selected and the area left to succession there would be no direct impacts to California condor. However, indirect and cumulative impacts are realized with a no treatment action. The succession of the ecosystem that would occur under a no action management system would involve indirect and cumulative effects but these would occur over a relatively long period of time (20-50 years.) Impacts as a result of selecting the No Action alternative would not impact the species ability to occur on the Fishlake National Forest.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Because no California condor has been documented to occur on the Richfield Ranger District, impacts from the “Action Alternatives” would be negligible and difficult to detect. Any effect discussed in this section may only occur if condor populations spread north and developed on the Forest.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. While implementation actions would not likely impact the California condor, the effects of the treatments could impact the bird (if they migrated to the Fishlake National Forest (FNF)) and its habitat. The range of treatment acres between the alternatives will determine the amount of change in perching/roosting and foraging habitat. As described above, the primary species the California condor would prey upon would not be directly impacted by this action as the primary prey species use both conifer and early serial aspen communities for parts of their life cycle. It is common for California condor to prey on the carcasses of un-recovered big game animals from hunting season or the parts of a harvested big game animal left from field dressing. Also included in this are fish that have either died or parts of fish that have been left behind after cleaning. They are also found utilizing the carcasses of dead livestock animals that have expired for unknown reasons on the summer range. As treatments would be conducted and big game animals attracted to them, a higher number of hunters would hunt treated areas to take advantage of higher concentrations of big game species. As a result, the potential for habitat enhancement by increasing foraging habitat for some potential prey species is higher with action alternatives than the No Action alternative. As a result, treatments to enhance the California condor occupancy are not crucial to manage for a sustainable population of condor on the Forest. Based on this analysis, implementation of the action alternatives would impact perching and roosting habitat in varying degrees but would not impact the species adversely by modifying any one of the primarily habitat components necessary for persistence of the species on the Fishlake National Forest . As more acres are treated more opportunities for carrion and prey would be made available to California condor.  Cumulative Effects:  Effects to the Condor over time and from the previous actions on Monroe Mountain will be minimal. Because there is little habitat features to support this species it is unlikely the mountain would support a viable population. Past, present and future habitat improvement projects would help provide opportunites in the form of prey. They depend on carrion (dead animal carcasses) for food. Prey would come in a slight increase of dead animals in the treatment areas. This increase could come from a higher number of wildlife and domestic animals being attracted to the site due to improved vegetative conditions. Animals may inadvertenly die there or be wounded from a hunter, not located and retrieved.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Sensitive Species  Sensitive wildlife species: (Table 4: List of Threatened, Endangered, Sensitive, MIS and Candidate Species), Bald eagle, Northern goshawk, Greater sage-grouse, Townsend’s big eared bat, Spotted bat, Three-toed woodpecker, and Flammulated owl. Suitable habitat does not occur in the project area for Bighorn sheep, Pygmy rabbit, and Peregrin falcon and therefore these three species will not be discussed further in this document. Bald Eagle, Northern goshawk, Greater sage-grouse, Townsend’s big eared bat, Spotted bat, Three-toed woodpecker and Flammulated owl will also be covered in the Biological Evaluation.   Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Bald eagles have been known to occur on the Fishlake National Forest during the late fall, early spring and winter months. During this time Bald eagles tend to concentrate wherever food is available, often around open water where fish and waterfowl can be caught. After the open water freezes, Bald eagles become more opportunistic and eat whatever is available. At this point Bald eagles generally move down to the foothills and valleys to feed on small mammals and carrion (Rodriguez 2008).  Utah hosts one of the largest state populations of wintering bald eagles. More than 1,200 bald eagles have been counted in Utah during recent years. About 3,000 to4,000 of the 13,000 bald eagles that winter in the lower 48 states occur west of the Rocky Mountains. Twenty-five to thirty percent of these western eagles spend the winter in Utah, indicating the significance of Utah's winter habitat (UDWR 2009). In 2009 the USFWS published a Post De-listing monitoring plan in the lower contiguous 48 states (USFWS 2009).The main threat to Bald eagles is habitat loss and disturbance from development of shoreline areas, recreation, logging, road building and mining (Spahr et al. 1991).  The proposed project would create some positive effects for this species and increase habitat effectiveness by creating more snags in the burned ares for perching, attracting more prey species to a newly treated area, and hunter opportunites would increase thus having the potential to have gut piles and unretrieved carcasses available for foraging.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no changes to the habitat quality and quantity other than those created by nature events such as from fire, wind events and insect killed open areas. Because very few Bald eagles occur on the Fishlake National Forest impacts from the No Action would be negligible and difficult to detect.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under the No Action Alternative, direct adverse effects would not occur. However, potential indirect effects may eventually occur from natural succession events as the area moves from early/mid serial species to late seral communities. With this change their would be an increase in roosting and perching habitat with decreases in foraging habitat other than those foraging areas associated with roads and road kill mammals. This would not likely decrease suitable habitat effectiveness to a degree that would be detectable. As succession progressed the quality of Bald eagle habitat over time would change as prey species associated with early serial species and dominated landscape would change as conifer species die. Conversely, as aspen dominated landscapes are converted over time into more conifer dominated landscapes the diversity of prey species would change but only slightly as the primary species that eagles are feeding upon use both aspen and conifer dominated landscapes.  The areas dominated by conifer would remain susceptible to large wildfire events. If a wildfire occurred it is likely that the intensity of the burn could not be managed and an added decrease in habitat effectiveness would occur to peraching and roosting habitat. This is because the wildfire would probably occur in the summertime when the acreage would be larger, without a mosaic pattern, and the severity would be higher with plant recovery and re-establishment extended over a longer period of time.  If the No Action Alternative was selected and the area left to succession there would be no direct impacts to Bald eagles. However, indirect and cumulative impacts are realized with a no treatment action. The succession of the ecosystem that would occur under a no action management system would involve indirect and cumulative effects but these would occur over a relatively long period of time (20-50 years). Impacts as a result of selecting the No Action alternative would not impact the species ability to occur on the Fishlake National Forest given the limited numbers and distribution of Bald eagles in the Monroe Mountain area.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. Since Bald eagles are seasonal visitors to Monroe Mountain it is expected that most mechanical and prescribed burn activities would be completed by early November when the first Bald eagle migrate to the mountain. While implementation actions would not likely impact the Bald eagle the effects of the treatments would impact the bird and its habitat. The range of treatment acres between the alternatives will determine the amount of change in perching/roosting and foraging habitat. As described above, the primary species the Bald eagle is foraging upon would not be directly impacted by this action as the primary prey species use both conifer and early serial aspen communities for parts of their life cycle. It is common for Bald eagles to prey on the carcasses of un-recovered big game animals from hunting season or the parts of a harvested big game animal left from field dressing. Also included in this are fish that have either died or parts of fish that have been left behind after cleaning. They are also found utilizing the carcasses of dead livestock animals that have expired for unknown reasons on the summer range. As treatments would be conducted and big game animals attracted to them, a higher number of hunters would hunt treated areas to take advantage of higher concentrations of big game species. As a result, the potential for habitat enhancement by increasing foraging habitat for some potential prey species is higher with action alternatives than the No Action alternative. However, as stated previously, Bald eagles are only late fall, winter and perhaps early spring inhabitants and impacts to the bird and its habitat. As a result, treatments to enhance the Bald eagle occupancy are not crucial to manage for a sustainable population of eagles on the Forest. Based on this analysis, implementation of the action alternatives would impact perching and roosting habitat in varying degrees but would not impacts the species adversely by modifying any one of the primarily habitat components necessary for persistence of the species on the Fishlake National Forest. As more acres are treated more opportunities for carrion and prey are made available to Bald eagles.  Cumulative Effects:  Effects to the Bald Eagle over time and from the previous actions on Monroe Mountain will be minimal. Bald eagles are known to use the mountain and the proposed project area seasonally. They arrive in early November and persist in the area until late March. They depend on carrion (dead animal carcasses) for food, but also kill their own prey. As winter snows increase in depth at the higher elevations eagles generally migrate to lower altitudes where carrion and prey are present. Past, present and future habitat improvement projects would help provide opportunites in the form of prey. Prey in the form of an increase of dead animals in the treatment areas. This increase would come from a higher number of wildlife and domestic animals being attracted to the site due to improved vegetative conditions. Animals may inadvertenly die there or be wounded from a hunter, not located and retrieved.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Note: Though Golden eagles are not considerd “TES” by the Intermountain Region of the Forest Service; however, it may be worthy to note that they occupy some of the same habitat as Bald eagles and use Monroe Mountain in a similar way. The main differnce in life cycle terms is that Golden eagles can be residents to the area, but can also be seasonal migrants like Bald eagles. The action alternatives would be compliant with the Bald and Golden eagle Protection Act and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and Executive Order 13186. See the discussion above to draw similarities for the Golden eagle; however, is only discussed here as a side note. Migratory birds are discussed further below.  Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Prescribed fire, wildfire, and mechanical thinning activities that occur within Northern goshawk territories may create habitat disturbances that would likely cause abandonment if not carefully mitigated by following the habitat recommendations identified in the Fishlake Forest Plan and other sources of best available science such as Graham et al. 1999. Implementation of these best science practices are part of the actions identified for this project. If activities occur within nest areas (NA) and post fledgling family areas (PFAs), territory abandonment would likely occur if Forest Plan requirements were not followed. The displacement of adult and juvenile birds, if present, would likely result in mortality and impact the viability of this species. The District has developed alternatives and project design criteria that would minimize the chance of Northern goshawks being displaced because of project activities. Some project activities may remove or degrade potential foraging habitat in the shortterm (5-15 years). However, the quality and quantity of potential foraging habitat would likely increase in select areas as aspen recovers following project implementation. The amount of habitat potentially impacted by project activities varies by alternative, and depends on the alternative selected, weather related events, use of the area by ungulates and other environmental factors. To understand which alternatives would impact the goshawk and its prey more or less it is important to discuss some of the key habitat requirements and guidelines that have been established by researchers.  Important to the architectural structure of a goshawk territory (including both the NA and PFA) is the combination of an older class of forest type vegetation (mixed conifer-aspen) including tall mature trees with interlocking crowns, large trees, large down woody debris, snags (mix of structural snags), water, understory vegetation, and openings. All these structural components are crucial to the existence and persistence of goshawk. Security habitat from predators (as the Great-horned owl known to prey on goshawk chicks and adults on the Fishlake N.F.) comes in the form of a balance of the above mentioned components maintained in an undisturbed fashion to protect goshawk young and adults. Nesting habitat structure with open conditions allows for the predation of goshawks, and especially their nestlings, by great horned owls (Bubo virginianus) (Boal and Mannan 1994; Moore and Henny 1983; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994). Nestling mortality may increase during periods of low food availability (Moore and Henny 1983; Rohner and Doyle 1992; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994; Zachel 1985).  Another crucial aspect of managing for the goshawk is management of vegetation for the bird and its prey. Reynolds et al. 1992 and Graham et al. 1999 both discuss the importance of managing a balance of habitat for the goshawk and its prey. Goshawks prefer to forage in closed canopy forests with moderate tree densities as compared to young open forests (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Goshawks take prey from small openings, although they usually hunt these areas from perches near the edge (Younk and Bechard 1994b). Medium to large-sized birds (woodpeckers, robins, grouse, or jays) and mammals (ground and tree squirrels and hares) tend to dominate breeding season diets (Squires and Reynolds 1997).  In general, goshawks nest in mature to old forests with relatively large trees, high canopy closure (relative to surrounding areas), sparse ground cover and open understories. Nests are often located near the bottom of moderately steep slopes, close to water, and often adjacent to a canopy break (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Important internal components of forests in Utah include snags, multiple canopies, and down woody debris (Reynolds, et. al. 1994).  The key comparison element for evaluating how the alternatives affect northern goshawk is the amount of nesting habitat affected (# of acres of aspen, or spruce/fir treated) and prey base affected (# of acres of foraging communities treated).  The underlying concern with a project of this scale is how treatments in goshawk territories would impact their continued use and return back to the territory post treatment. The Richfield Ranger District, and especially Monroe Mountain, has the largest concentration of goshawk territories known on the Fishlake National Forest. Of the goshawk territories currently known on the District, 22 are on Monroe Mountain, and 18 are within the direct/indirect effects area for this proposed project. As nests are monitored on the District some are documented to have blown out of the tree and a nest no longer exists. A search is done for a replacement alternative nest and if found it is documented.  In a previous action on the Richfield Ranger District, in the Oldroyd-Monroe Meadows area on Monroe Mountain, a treatment within the Post Fledgling Area (PFA) occurred. Implementation of the Forest Plan for Goshawk Management was implemented. These treatments were carefully evaluated prior to managing the area for hazardous fuels and it was determined that the risk of wildfire coming off the Fishlake National Forest to private lands was a substantial threat. Due to this threat an experimental treatment was developed to try and reduce fuels and manage for the bird. Treatments were implemented to reduce fuels near private land and a cabin. Although Forest Plan Guidelines were implemented, abandonment occurred and the pair has not been back to the area for the past two years. Being able to determine the exact cause and effect is difficult; however, it is the judgment of the Forest and district biologists that it was a direct result of the vegetation treatments and not applying our best knowledge to about the needs of the bird. Managing for bird persistence in the same area as summer cabins and private lands is difficult. As a result, thinning and burning treatments for this project in the Monroe area is a crucial component to the viability of the Northern goshawk population on the Fishlake National Forest. It is strongly recommended to not allow any treatments in NAs on Monroe Mountain.  A thinning in a PFA may be designed to help prevent the spread of wildfire to private property while maintaining the integrity of the territory (Forest Plan, Northern Goshawk Amendment, Guideline Z).  In Forest Plan direction for the Northern goshawk, forest vegetation structural stage classes are discussed and how they relate to preference by goshawk for nesting, post fledgling family areas, or rearing and teaching of young and foraging. Vegetation structural stage’s (VSS) range from 1-6 (with 1 being smallest and 6 being largest). The VSS classes found on Monroe Mountain average in the “3” range with more in the 2, 3, and 4 range and with fewer 5s and 6s on the top end. We find that VSS 5 and VSS 6 trees found on Monroe Mountain are low in numbers. With this VSS class in limited supply so is nesting habitat for the goshawk. Therefore, care must be taken to retain the largest trees on the landscape.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct impacts on this species, and subsequently population numbers and viability of this species would remain intact.  Potential indirect effects may come due to natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. Portions of the analysis area would rotate from early/mid seral to late seral, while other areas into early seral. If a large scale high severity wildfire occurred this could impact habitat availability and effectiveness for the goshawk by reducing nesting and foraging habitat.  If no management is implemented the area through time would remain susceptible to a wildfire event where lighting could cause a fire that may be difficult to manage and impacts to key habitat components could occur. This could result in a wildfire that would be larger, without a mosaic pattern, and the severity would be higher and plant recovery and re-establishment would take longer. This type of large scale uncharacteristic wildfire could be stand replacing, which could result in large patches of even-age regeneration across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. If large blocks of suitable habitat were burned it would impact overall habitat effectiveness. If large blocks of aspen regeneration and recruitment occurred it could add to the diversity of the landscape depending upon the location, size and configuration on the landscape. Wildfires on Monroe Mountain may not be detrimental to the goshawk and its prey. It would depend on the location of the fires and the proximity to nesting and PFA habitat. The uncertainty of wildfire in this landscape is difficult to predict and therefore impacts to this species and its prey from fire is speculation. However, science tells us that fire will occur but the size, severity and location is also an uncertainty.  Implementation of the No Action alternative will result in an undetermined amount of habitat effectiveness change in an undetermined area and therefore is not recommended for active management for this sensitive species and Management Indicator Species.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 -- Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 50% treatment is proposed in all action alternatives (2- 5).  Mature goshawks are known to hunt an area approximately 5,000 acres per territory foraging in a wide variety of forested habitat. Seral and stable aspen are found within their hunting territory. In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen in the proposed project alternative 2 proposes 51% of stable aspen for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10) (comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  There are approximately 10,461 acres of Post Fledgling Area goshawk habitat within the proposed project area. There are approximately 2,817 acres of Nest Replacement Area acres in the proposed project area. Habitat for goshawks would be affected in all alternatives due to the combined size of the foraging areas (5,000 acres for each territory); however an array of treatment options is proposed or not proposed within the different alternatives.  Goshawks are known to use a variety of habitats throughout their lifecycle. Removal of vegetation from a prescribed burn or mechanical thinning could have an indirect effect of decreasing foraging areas for an undetermined time period until it regrows back into suitable foraging habitat to support prey species. This could take 5-15 years or it could be greater than 100 years depending upon the location of the treatment and the species that inhabit the area. Goshawks are known to prey on a variety of mammals and birds such as; rabbits, squirrels, chipmunks, flickers, grouse, and jays. Burning would decrease habitat and populations of some prey species (especially small mammals) as woody debris is burned and increase populations of others (such as jays or woodpeckers) as snags are created. The larger mammals are more advantageous for them to forage upon as they provide more energy for the effort. As stated above, it is difficult to determine how long suitable vegetation will take to regrow and provide habitat for prey. This can further be complicated as the area is managed for other resources such as domestic and wild ungulates. Ungulates can slow or suppress suitable habitat for prey species, as well as weather events and storm patterns.  Goshawks can breed successfully in forests where timber harvesting has occurred (Reynolds and others 1994; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994) but they appear to prefer stands of mature and overmature trees for nesting and foraging (Bright-Smith and Mannan 1994). Also, occupancy of the nest stand has been positively associated with patch size (Woodbridge and Detrich 1994). However, the effects of reducing the number and size of mature trees on existing goshawk densities or productivity are unknown. Population models for species in fragmented forest landscapes suggest that sharp declines in viability can occur if habitat decreases over the longterm (Franklin and Forman 1987; Lamberson and others 1992). The removal of suitable nesting habitat through timber harvesting or other management activities can be a threat to the goshawk (McCarthy 1989).  Alternative 2 presents the least impacts to goshawk territories as it proposes no treatments in the NAs or PFAs of any goshawk territory (see Table 9 and Table 10 below). This alternative allows for treatments within the foraging area that will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and opens areas up for foraging by the goshawk. This alternative also allows for management of down woody debris, and snag retention, which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. No impacts to viability as a result of Alternative 2 are expected.  Alternative 3 proposes no treatments in the NAs and treatments in the PFA that range from approximately 14-61% (two territories range in the single digit range because they are on the edge of proposed treatment areas). This alternative will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and open areas up for foraging by the goshawk. While it allows for treatments within the foraging areas similar to Alternative 2, it also allows treatments within 18 PFAs which will create open areas and make fledglings and adults vulnerable to predators. Opening up the PFAs will impact the persistence of these territories, and impact the overall viability of the population. Management of down woody debris, and snag retention, is also included which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. Impacts from alternative 3 may affect the viability of the species.  Alternative 4 proposes treatments in the NAs that range from approximately 60-98% and treatments in PFAs that range from approximately 35-90% (two territories range in the single digit range because they are on the edge of proposed treatment areas). This alternative will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and open areas up for foraging by the goshawk. While it allows for treatments within the foraging areas similar to Alternative 2, it also allows treatments within NAs and PFAs which will create open areas making nesting adults and juveniles and also making fledglings and adults vulnerable to predators in the PFAs. Opening up the NAs and PFAs will impact the persistence of these territories, and impact the overall viability of the population. Management of down woody debris, and snag retention, is also included Table 9 NRA Nest Replace Areas (NRA) Big Table North 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 178 0 178 98.3 0 0 0 181 0.0% Big Table South 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 147 0 147 80.3 0 0 0 183 0.0% Brindley Flat 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 119 0 119 59.2 0 0 0 201 0.0% Cove Nest 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0.0% Deer Spring 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 56 0 56 9.3 0 0 0 601 0.0% Doe Hole 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 154 0 154 87.0 0 0 0 177 0.0% Eagle Flat 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 178 0 178 90.8 0 0 0 196 0.0% Hunters Flat 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 188 0 188 97.9 0 0 0 192 0.0% Langdon East 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 152 0 152 84.4 0 0 0 180 0.0% Langdon West 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 125 0 125 69.4 0 0 0 180 0.0% Magelby 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 170 0 170 76.6 0 0 0 222 0.0% Manning Creek 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 169 0 169 79.3 0 0 0 213 0.0% Nielsen Canyon 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 119 0 119 58.9 0 0 0 202 0.0% North Big Lake 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0.0% Oldroyd 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 9 0 9 1.3 0 0 0 682 0.0% Paxton 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 118 0 118 71.1 0 0 0 166 0.0% Sherwood Forest 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 121 0 121 77.6 0 0 0 156 0.0% Indian Ranch 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0.0% Grand Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2,003 0 2,003 53.7% 0 0 0 3,732 Table 10 PFA Post Fledgling Areas (PFA) Big Table North 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 348 0 348 56.2 526 0 526 85.0 0 0 0 619 0.0% Big Table South 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 287 0 287 50.7 434 0 434 76.7 0 0 0 566 0.0% Brindley Flat 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 163 0 163 26.4 282 0 282 45.7 0 0 0 617 0.0% Cove Nest 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 263 0 263 43.8 430 0 430 71.7 0 0 0 600 0.0% Deer Spring 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 56 0 56 9.3 56 0 56 9.3 0 0 0 601 0.0% Doe Hole 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 113 0 113 18.8 267 0 267 44.4 0 0 0 601 0.0% Eagle Flat 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 378 0 378 61.2 556 0 556 90.0 0 0 0 618 0.0% Hunters Flat 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 327 0 327 53.4 515 0 515 84.2 0 0 0 612 0.0% Langdon East 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 294 0 294 49.6 446 0 446 75.2 0 0 0 593 0.0% Langdon West 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 236 0 236 39.5 361 0 361 60.4 0 0 0 598 0.0% Magelby 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 279 0 279 46.8 450 0 450 75.5 0 0 0 596 0.0% Manning Creek 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 329 0 329 42.6 498 0 498 64.5 0 0 0 772 0.0% Nielsen Canyon 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 184 0 184 29.9 302 0 302 49.0 184 0 184 616 29.9% North Big Lake 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 278 0 278 47.2 445 0 445 75.6 0 0 0 589 0.0% Oldroyd 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 9 0 9 1.3 9 0 9 1.3 0 0 0 682 0.0% Paxton 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 196 0 196 33.8 314 0 314 54.1 196 0 196 580 33.8% Sherwood Forest 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 88 0 88 14.6 210 0 210 34.9 0 0 0 601 0.0% Indian Ranch 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0.0 0 0 0 0.0% Grand Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 3,828 0 3,828 36.6% 6,101 0 6,101 58.3% 380 0 380 10,461 3.6% Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity Approx total PFA Acres % of PFA treated Alt 5 % NRA Treated Alt 5 Alternative 5 Approx. NRA Acres Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity % NRA Treated Alt 4 % of PFA treated Alt 1 % of PFA treated Alt 3 % of PFA treated Alt 4 % of PFA treated Alt 2 Grand Total Grand Total Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Grand Total % NRA Treated Alt 4 Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Grand Total Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Grand Total Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn SeverityAlternative 1 Grand Total Mechanical and Prescribed Prescribed Burn - Mixed Burn Severity % NRA Treated Alt 4 % NRA Treated Alt 4 Grand Total which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. Impacts from alternative 4 may affect the viability of the species.  Alternative 5 proposes no treatments in the NAs and light treatments in 2 PFAs that range from 30-34% in two territories. This alternative will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and open areas up for foraging by the goshawk. While it allows for treatments within the foraging areas similar to Alternative 2, it also allows treatments within 2 PFAs which will create open areas and make fledglings and adults vulnerable to predators. Opening up the two PFAs (30-34%) will impact the persistence of these territories, and impact the overall viability of the population. Management of down woody debris, and snag retention, is also included which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management.   Table 9 and Table 10: Percent of Nest Replacement Area (Table 9) and Post Fledgling Area (Table 10) of goshawk territory affected by alternative.  Past treatments within PFAs have not only caused abandonment on the Fishlake but also on the Dixie National Forest to the South (Rodriguez 2014, personal conversation). Based on Fishlake data and observations from other goshawks biologists, not treating in the NAs for this project is important to the viability of the goshawk on Monroe Mountain and on the Fishlake National Forest. Treating within PFAs is generally not recommended in order to keep disturbance to a minimum. Tables 9 and 10 display the correlation between territories and treatment type by alternative.  Surveys conducted in 2014 revealed two new goshawk nests with associated NAs and PFAs; however, only one of the territories occurs within the boundaries of this project. This new territory will be referred to as the “Indian Ranch Territory”. Approximately 310 acres of this territory occurs within the boundaries of this project. The nest was active in 2014 and successful in producing two fledglings. These 310 acres make up less than 1% of the project area. The majority of the 310 acres occur in stable aspen. To maintain habitat requirements and population viability, I recommend that no treatments occur in these 310 acres. These 310 acres could become part of the 40% non-treatment mosaic pattern that is required to remain to meet goshawk foraging guidelines. These 310 acres are discussed further in the Wildlife Biological Evaluation.  The following measures will be implemented on the Monroe Mountain project to ensure proper management is occurring and viability considered and met;  • “Monitoring requirements” (appendix CC) found within the goshawk amendment for the six forests in Utah discuss the following process: • ID m-1--Question: Are known goshawk territories on national forests remaining occupies? • Item to Measure: Goshawk territory occupancy at the forest level. • Acceptable Range: Less than 20% decline in territory occupancy over a 3 year period. • Measurement Frequency: Annually (report every 3 years) • ID m-2—Question: Are mitigation measures (standards and guidelines) employed during vegetative management project implementation sufficient to prevent territory abandonment? • Item to Measure: Goshawk territory occupancy following vegetative management treatments. • Acceptable Range: No territory abandonment on projects where mitigation measures are used. • Measurement Frequency: The first full breeding period following activity in all projects where pre-project surveys determined territory occupancy. (report annually) • ID m-3—Question: Is habitat connectivity as represented by structural and species diversity and dispersion thereof, within and among 5th and 6th order watersheds (or equivalent ecological scale) being maintained? • Item to Measure: Spatial dispersion patch size of mature and old forest groups within a 5th to 6th order watershed. Tree species composition mix within mature and old groups within a landscape. • Acceptable Range: Approximately 40% of the coniferous and 30% of the aspen forested acres within a landscape are in VSS 5 and 6 classes. Seral species characteristic of the cover type are well represented VSS 5 and 6 classes. • Measurement Frequency: Completion of each landscape assessment. (report every 5 years) • Other sections of the monitoring matrix speak of monitoring long-term for down woody material and snags.  Northern Goshawk Conclusion  Maintaining adequate structural components within the NAs and PFAs of goshawk territories to ensure habitat effectiveness which encompasses the entire portion of their life cycle when they are on the forest is crucial to maintain viability. It is also important to follow recommendations in foraging habitat to manage for prey species habitat. These structural components referred to in the goshawk amendment will help maintain a prey base for the adults to utilize during mating and rearing season as well as for the fledglings when they are old enough to hunt for themselves within the territory. Alternatives 3, 4 and 5 do not allow enough of the habitat requirements to maintain this need. Alternative 2 would allow enough habitat requirements to be maintained. Alternatives 3, 4, and 5 may cause territory abandonment across the Monroe landscape. This abandonment may result in dispersion from Monroe Mountain to other mountain ranges or make the birds susceptible to predation. We then would move further away from our Forest Plan goal of a viable population across the forest.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to goshawk in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing and private land development on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. All these types of disturbances can affect goshawk occupancy within their territory to some degree. As we move into the future for goshawk habitat management it is important to keep in mind Monroe Mountain currently provides prime habitat to foster the life cycle components needed to sustain a healthy population. The mountain has more goshawk territories per square mile than any other district on the Fishlake National Forest. A delicate balance is needed to provide current territorial features while planning for key habitat components in the future.  Section 5 of this report describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Greater Sage Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriquez, 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: The Greater sage grouse is a sagebrush obligate species because sagebrush is essential to their survival and is used for food and cover throughout their entire life cycle. The proposed project analysis area does contain acres of sagebrush but they are not targeted for treatment. The proposed project is a “forest type” treatment. Traffic used in project implementation will transect through areas of suitable sagebrush habitat. A direct effect could occur if a grouse were hit by a vehicle in suitable habitat area as traffic traveled to and from the project areas during implementation. A remote population of sage-grouse does occur on the very south end of Monroe Mountain (approximately 5 miles south from where active treatments are proposed). No active treatments are proposed on the south end of Monroe Mountain. Also, there are several known leks and populations that occur in areas adjacent to Monroe Mountain on BLM and private land.  According to trend data, sage grouse numbers on Parker Mountain have been increasing since 1999 although numbers are fluctuating. In 2008, sage grouse numbers slightly dipped on leks for the Parker Mountain population; 930 males were observed on annually counted leks, which is slightly down from 936 in 2007 (UDWR, 2008). The UDWR expects sage grouse population numbers to increase because during the last 2 years they have discovered 9 new lek sites. Any lek sites that have birds on them for three consecutive years gets included in the trend data.  Also in a study conducted on the Parker Mountain, BYU research students combined with the Parker Mountain Adaptive Resource Management (PARM) Local Working Group to compare treatment types in sage grouse habitat. There treatments consisted of a control plot, Lawson Aerator, Dixie Harrow and Spike chemical treatment. They concluded that sage grouse preferred treated to non-treated sites (Dahlgren 2006). A FS-UDWR cooperative study was also conducted on the Hell’s Hole sage grouse population at the south end of Monroe Mountain. Similar results to the Parker Mountain Study were documented (Kreitzer 2006).  Sage grouse surveys of the project area were conducted in birding routes in 2012, 2013 and 2014. No sage grouse were found as a result of these recent surveys. A single sage grouse was documented by a District Wildlife Technician in the late 90s within an area on the eastern bench in the central part of the mountain; however, no further individuals or groups have been documented to date. Approximately 44,187 (39,287 of Mountain Big Sage and 4,900 Silver Sage) acres of sage are found within the Cumulative Effects Area for the project (Forest Boundary). Not all of these 44,187 acres of sagebrush are considered suitable habitat for Greater sage grouse. Not all sagebrush is considered suitable because various sage types occur, densities vary, aspect varies, patch size varies, sagebrush understories vary, and geography varies. Since this project is designed to treat forest types (aspen, mixed conifer, spruce/fir) and no intentional treatment efforts are designed in sagebrush, no habitat or suitable habitat would be altered. As vehicles traveled through suitable sagebrush habitat and if sage grouse populations expanded to the project area, an individual grouse may get struck by a vehicle. This would be a direct effect. We are not aware of any grouse being hit by vehicles on the south end of the mountain where we have sage grouse. Indirect effects may occur if sagebrush habitat adjacent to the proposed forest treatment areas improved in habitat effectiveness. This may be due to some ungulate grazing pressure being re-distributed to the newly treated areas allowing sagebrush areas improve.    Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Greater sage grouse. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as sagebrush continues to increase in density causing the understory of grass and forbs to diminish resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less optimum for Greater sage grouse foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  As noted in the discussion above this proposed treatment is designed for direct treatments in forested ecosystems, it is unlikely that many acres of sagebrush that contain sage-nester habitat would be affected. Some direct minor impacts may occur to sagebrush as equipment is used to go along the edge of sagebrush meadows to transport equipment or personnel for treatment implementation. Indirectly, vehicles traveling through sage habitat to and from project areas may cause dust and an occasional direct impact with a vehicle. None of these impacts pose a threat to the integrity of the habitat or viability of the Greater sage grouse.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities on Monroe Mountain in suitable sagebrush habitat for sage grouse are important to the Richfield Ranger District. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing, habitat treatments and private land development on Monroe Mountain.  Through the years acres of sagebrush have been mechanically treated, prescribed burned or burned from natural ignited wildfires. Past mechanical treatments in sagebrush have been carefully designed in a mosaic pattern and treated with tools that would thin sagebrush to meet wildlife habitat objectives. Large scale forestry projects may not produce any cumulative affect on sagegrouse.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) and Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Population densities are poorly understood because these species are difficult to monitor (Rodriguez 2008). They are still only suspected to occur on the Richfield Ranger District at the present time. Surveys were conducted across the District at select locations in 1993 (Toone 1993). Surveys with an electronic bat detector were conducted in the project area during the 2014 field season. The electronic detector was deployed at two riparian areas within the project area. Final data collected was sent to Titley Scientific for species verification. A final report was created by Titley Scientific (Corben 2015) and submitted to the Richfield Ranger District. Seven species were confidently identified in the dataset. They are: Big Freetailed Bat (NYMA), Mexican Freetailed Bat (TABR), Hoary Bat (LACI), Big Brown Bat (EPFU), Silverhaired Bat (LANO), Long-eared Myotis (MYEV), Little Brown Bat (MYLU). There were five files from Site 2 which may have been from two further species. One of these might have been Pallid Bat (ANPA) and the other might have been Fringed Myotis (MYTH). At this point Townsend’s Bigeared bat and Spotted bats have not been documented in or around the project area according to surveys. Understanding literature about these bats gives us the opportunity to take a hard look at the life cycle and distribution of these species. The main threat to these bat species is human disturbance at roost or hibernacula sites, because they will abandon these sites if disturbed (Spahr et al. 1991). Direct effects would come in the form of a decrease of prey in the removal or burning of trees. Moths are in important part of their diet and forested areas provide foraging opportunities. Riparian areas inter-connected within the treatment areas would realize improvement and prey would increase for bats. Indirectly as the forest succession advanced over time insect prey for bats would improve.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species. Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative 1, no adverse direct effects would be expected to Townsend’s big-eared or spotted bats. As a potential unknown effect, the area would remain susceptible to a large wildfire. If fire could not be managed, a reduction of habitat effectiveness would occur. If habitat was altered and conifer trees burned this could impact foraging habitat quantity and distribution across the landscape. This could cause bats to move in location but is not likely to impact viability of the species.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres.  To date, studies assessing the impact of fire regimes on Spotted bats are not available. As Spotted bats tend to forage over open meadows and woodlands, some combination of silvicultural practices with prescribed fire to create open areas and maintain herbaceous plant diversity (and, presumably therefore, promote insect prey base diversity) may benefit this species (Schmidt 2003). Insect occurrence and density depend on adequate quantity, quality, proportions, configurations, and distribution of wet meadows and insect-supporting terrestrial vegetation,such as grasses and sedges in meadows and forest openings (Luce 2007).  No treatments will be conducted within open meadows of grasses or sagebrush. Minimal treatments are proposed for and would be conducted in riparian areas while no treatments would be conducted in bogs, or seeps where prey for bats may be disrupted.  This proposed treatment could have an effect on the habitat effectiveness of bats. Bats find moths and other important inscect prey species in conifer forests. As treatments are implemented bats would have to move to other non treated areas. This would compress the use with bats already existing in the non treated areas. Therefore, there could be a direct and indirect impact on this species in the short-term. This could cause bats to move in location but is not likely to impact viability of the species. However, a long-term benefit would be realized after the forest successional stages became more advanced.    Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities on Monroe Mountain that would affect bat habitat are minmal. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing, habitat treatments and private land development on Monroe Mountain. Maintaining a balance of forested ecosytems, sage-grass and riparian habitat have helped provide good bat habitat on Monroe Mountain. There are ample small cliffs and outcrops for hibernating. A large scale forestry project will reduce the amount of insect prey available in the short term. Long-term positive affects will be added as riparian systems improve. Healthy young forests will provide a variety and abundance of insects.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Three-toed Woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Three-toed woodpeckers are found on Monroe Mountain within the Engelmann spruce forest types. These are mainly found on the central and northern part of the mountain. We have noticed they follow the spruce bark beetle outbreaks on the mountain. Past mechanical forestry projects on Monroe Mountain in Engelmann spruce have implemented forest plan guidance by managing for snags in groups and clumps of snags for cavity dependent species including the Three-toed woodpecker. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain nest cavities, prey, and cover for the woodpecker.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct impact to habitat for the Three-toed woodpecker.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. Wildfire would likely occur in the summertime when the acreage could be larger, without a mosaic pattern, and the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment would take longer. As this occurs, prey species abundance would decrease thus effecting Three-toed woodpeckers.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10- in migratory bird section). If the full amount of these percentages were treated and the appropriate number of snags, as described in the Forest Plan were retained, Three-toed woodpecker populations would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments.  Implementation of any of the action alternatives (2-5) will temporarily reduce Three-toed woodpecker habitat in the landscape. Because the landscape is not lacking snags, suitable habitat (snag habitat) will be present across the landscape over time. As with all landscapes dominated by dead trees, as these areas decay and turn into down woody debris, insect populations will be reduced and woodpecker populations will move and may decrease on the landscape. Implementation of these action alternatives may slow down the rapid progression of tree decay and allow woodpecker populations to be managed over a larger period of time. To minimize impacts from prescribed fire, as described in the EIS, no direct fire ignitions would occur during the nesting season (usually between May 15th and August 1st) in areas where cavity nesting birds such as Three-toed woodpeckers are found. Delaying any ignition until the late summer will allow cavity nesting birds to have completed their nesting, incubation, fledgling and dispersal portion of their life cycle for the season. The adults and young would be able to flee from dangerous conditions that fire may impose on them. To minimize impacts from mechanical treatments on cavity nesting birds found in a spruce-fir dominated forest type, thinning activities would usually commence after July 15. This timing would allow time for cavity nesting birds to complete their nesting and rearing season. Mechanical treatments provide the opportunity to selectively leave snags in groups or clumps throughout the site to provide a continuance of habitat features that are useable during and after the treatment. These design features provide protection (delayed timing of treatments in the season) of the nesting-rearing season while providing habitat features (leaving snags and clumps of trees and 40% non-treated forested throughout the project) needed for future viable populations on Monroe Mountain.     Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to Three-toed woodpecker in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Past spruce beetle outbreaks have provided a flush in prey for all woodpecker species on the mountain, but especially the Three-toed. Populations of Three-toed woodpeckers thrive in beetle infested areas. As these areas are harvested or natural beetle life cycles complete populations of woodpeckers may vary over time. Future fire treatments will attract woodpeckers for a few years as they scavenge for bugs under the bark of burned trees. Populations on Monroe Mountain are expected to persist, be viable, and fluctuate with natural insect cycles and habitat treatment.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: On the Richfield Ranger District Flammulated owls have been detected in Douglas fir stands that contain some mature spruce and a light mix of aspen. The proposed project area contains acres of spruce, sub-alpine fir, aspen and Douglas fir. Flammulated owl surveys to regional protocol were conducted in the project area in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011 and 2014. Surveys for the 2014 field season were verified, analyzed and documented in the District database record and in GIS database at the end of the field season. At this time mapping occured to delineate (with our best judgment and ground knowledge) Douglas fir habitat that may be suitable for Flammulated owls. Based on these surveys, we have determined there are approximately 1,550 acres of Douglas fir dominated forest type on Monroe Mountain. Not all of these acres are found within areas proposed for treatments. To help minimize impacts to Flammulated owls, as described in chapter 2 of the EIS, no fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15 and after August 1) would be allowed. Very light “low severity” treatments of prescribed burning are possible to accomplish an understory type treatment while leaving overstory components intact (understanding that fire can have unpredictable actions we will be cautious to burn under uncertain conditions). Flammulated owls were detected each of the five years and were specific to Douglas fir habitat. Douglas fir habitat occurs within the project area mainly on the rims, and sharp ridgelines. The Douglas fir component of the spruce-fir mapped acres does not consist of a large quantity. It occurs in smaller acres and is patchy across the landscape. Moths and small mammals are the primary prey for owls. Moths are directly associated with trees. Owl surveys were conducted along major roads and trails as well as on foot through suitable habitat. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain cover for the Flammulated owl.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse impacts on population numbers for the Flammulated Owl.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow an indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. Wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment could take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on such large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today, which provides optimum Flammulated owl foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  Seral and stable aspen are found within their hunting territory. In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen in the proposed project alternative 2 proposes 51% for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  We estimate approximately 1,550 acres of Douglas fir are represented in the spruce-fir mix. Douglas fir habitat occurs within the project area mainly on the rims, and sharp ridgelines. The Douglas fir component of the spruce-fir mapped acres does not consist of a large quantity. It occurs in smaller acres and is patchy across the landscape. With the thinning treatments, the retention of large snags would occur where they are lacking in order to meet Forest Plan guidelines. Where available, stands would continue to maintain the number of snags required by the Forest Plan to support Flammulated owl nesting.  As conifer treatments occur around Douglas fir habitat, Flammulated owls would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments. Treatment areas are designed to leave nesting habitat with an associated foraging area. No fire ignitions, that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in the Douglas fir dominated areas, would occur as to preserve Flammulated owl habitat and populations on the mountain. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15th and after August 1st) would be allowed (refer to “low”, “medium” and “high” fire severity definitions in the EIS). By avoiding the Doug fir dominated stands with moderate and high fire severities, habitat effectiveness will be maintained and viable populations of owls will be retained on Monroe Mountain. From past fire experiences on Monroe Mountain it has been evident that it is hard to withhold fire from spreading into Doug fir stands. This is mainly due to Doug fir stands being surrounded by and inter-mingled with sub-alpine fir. This condition has caused fire in the past to transfer into Doug fir stands and affect owl habitat in some cases. The use of mechanical thinning treatments and/or control lines, as described in the EIS, and the use of low severity fire would help minimize impacts from prescribed fire. The use of mechanical thinning treatments and/or control lines and low severity fire would help maintain the existing Douglas fir stands and components needed for Flammulated owls to persist on the mountain.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to Flammulated owls in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Past timber projects have only affected small patches of Douglas fir habitat. Present Douglas fir patches found around the mountain commonly are used by Flammulated owl. Past and present conditions have left habitat effectiveness for owls in good condition. Future activities could play a role in how much habitat is disturbed or removed in the Douglas fir type. This would have an effect on the amount and quality of habitat that would remain for Flammulated owl.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Management Indicator Species (MIS)  Rocky Mountain Elk (Cervus elaphus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Elk habitat occurs across the entire Fishlake National Forest and the project area. There are approximately 1,458,049 acres of potentially suitable habitat on the Fishlake National Forest. Within the Fishlake LRMP II-29, Table II-8B, the estimated population size of elk on the Fishlake National Forest was 2,000 head in 1986 when the LRMP was signed. Now the estimated population on Monroe according to UDWR as of winter 2014 is 1,250 (Table 11). Helicopter counts are collected on a three-year basis. As a result of habitat improvement projects across the Forest, these data show an increase since 1986 when the plan was signed. The Division of Wildlife Resources collects population data and monitors harvest levels and trends of all big game populations, such as elk.  Big game are economically important species; hunting demands are high and expected to continue. This area is managed as a trophy bull elk hunt with some variation of spike bull hunts being tried over the past 5 years. Numerous cow tags have been issued in recent years to keep the herd within the respective Herd Management Plan.  Elk can be found throughout the analysis area in spring, summer and fall periods of the year. The area provides ideal habitat for elk during all important life cycle periods except for winter. The lower elevation portions of the proposed project area are transitional range which is when big game animals spend time post winter and post summer.  Hiding cover is defined as vegetated areas where brush and trees are tall or dense enough to hide 90 percent of a deer or elk at 200 feet. Foraging habitat is defined as areas that provide an adequate level of browse and non-woody plants for food. Areas of conifer/aspen and solitary aspen communities are especially important for elk calving habitat. These areas can be found throughout the analysis area. Elk prefer habitats where they are least disturbed. Studies have shown that big game avoid areas up to half a mile on each side of a road. This distance depends on topography, vegetation, and vehicle use near the road. Avoidance of these roaded areas decreases the habitat effectiveness in providing for big game needs.  The proposed project area is located at higher elevations that support a majority of summer range conditions for elk. A good balance of forage to cover ratios mixed with randomly dispersed water sources make the area ideal habitat for elk calving and rearing, breeding, and foraging in preparation for winter months. A large portion of the proposed treatment area is in a 4B (Managed for MIS) management stategy according to the Fishlake Land and Resource Management Plan. Elk use the entire proposed treatment area. Some areas within the project area are utilized more based on specific habitat components unique to the life cycle of elk. Elk are an economically important species in most all states that have established elk herds. The Monroe elk herd has an important economic value to the local communities. Non-consumptive use provides non hunters or non-permit holders the opportunity to travel to the mountain to view, photograph, listen to, and enjoy elk in a natural wild environment. The number of people that enjoy non-consumptive elk opportunites is greater than the consumptive user. Monroe Mountain Elk Unit is designated as a trophy bull unit where a person has to apply for a chance to draw one of approximatley 30-40 tags offered each year for a mature bull elk. In each case a tremendouse amount of money is spent in the local communities for gas, optical equipment, camera equipment, hunting equipment, camping equipment and all associated vehicle costs as well as many other associated costs. For this reason local public support is high to keep an abundant elk herd on the mountain. This support for elk by the public could be counter productive to the project if elk numbers need to be reduced to facilitate the success of aspen recruitment after treatments. It is well documented that elk are attracted to areas that have been burned or mechanically treated and aspen regeneration and recruitment is part of the management objective. Camera trap studies on Monroe Mountain verify elk, deer, cattle and sheep are attracted to aspen regeneration. Elk are new to the mountain in recent decades. They were not introduced to Monroe Mountain but established from neighboring units that had elk reintroduction in the early 1900s. The first elk sightings were in the early 1970s. The UDWR manages the population by limited entry bull hunts, spike only bull hunts, and cow hunts to keep the population within the elk plan level. Changes in hunt timing, location, and permit numbers per elk sex are recommened by the UDWR, presented through the public Regional Advisory Council Process and then made law on an annual basis through the Utah Wildlife Board. This process demonstrates that the Forest Service does not control hunted game species in the State of Utah.  Based on UDWR data current elk populations on Monroe Mountain have trended in the following way in Table 7:  In summary elk are a Management Indicator Species supported by the Fishlake LRMP, a locally important ecological species, a economically important species, a protected hunted population managed by the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources through a public process and through a cooperatively signed management plan.  The Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG) has developed a “Thresholds Document” and is recommending this document for inclusion in this project. It is designed to provide quantifiable browse thresholds and response options that could occur if browse thresholds are exceeded in treatment areas or if stable aspen stands don’t show improvement. This would provide protection of aspen regeneration from ungulate browsing and trigger mechanisms that could come into play if aspen browsing is occurring at unacceptable levels. Opportunities to monitor and manage successful aspen regeneration through the direction of the Thresholds Document would range from livestock use modification, big game hunts targeted at population reductions in target areas, wildlife hazing, wildlife fencing, and others (MMWG 2014). This document has received support from the local Regional Advisory Council and the State Wildlife Board     Table 7: Estimated elk population on Monroe Mountain Management Unit (UDWR) YEAR POPULATION ESTIMATE 1970’s Few elk sighted, 50 or less 1980’s Roughly 500 animals by end of 1980’s 1982 (first hunt-10 permits) --- 1994 (first helicopter survey) 1,000 1997 809 2000 1,775 2003 1,300 2006 900 2009 1050 2013 1,300 (Modeled Population) 2014 1,250 (Modeled Population)  Current Monroe Elk Plan Objective = 1,800  Direct effects to elk may occur during the implementation period when burning operations may cause some individuals to be burned over. They would also be driven from their cover areas and need to re-located to adjacent areas. Indirectly, elk would compound use on other adjacent areas for cover and forage with other elk. This could cause an over use of forage when compounded by livestock.  Cumulative effects for elk will be considered on National Forest System Lands (excluding BLM, State, or private) across the entire Monroe Mountain Unit since elk are migratory leaving summer range, transition range, and end up on winter range from November through April (depending length of winter condition).  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse impacts to habitat for late serial species, or improved habitat effectiveness on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative 1, no decrease in immediate habitat effectiveness for elk would occur. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may create decreases in habitat effectiveness on the quality of elk habitat over time as the variety of vegetation species is reduced as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain suitable until an uncharacteristic event occurs. The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today. The balance of forage to cover ratios would likely affect usable elk habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. This would cause elk to concentrate (on a short term basis 2-4 years) on other parts of the range which would compound effects to forage and space where other elk traditionally occupy.  This type of uncharacteristic wildfire could be stand replacing on such a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and alter the type of forest that exist today providing optimum elk habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. However, if this type of change occurred and the landscape had time to recover for a few years, elk would find the burned area attractive for forage consumption. A lack of cover for elk could be an issue.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  Seral and stable aspen are found within their spring, summer and fall life cycle areas. In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  Elk will calve in an aspen dominated forest type, but will soon train their offspring to use the mixed-conifer and spruce-fir forest types as thermal and hiding cover. A balance of open meadows associated with cover (forested types) is an important combination for elk on the mountain.  Direct impacts for elk will occur when treatments occur. They will be displaced from their traditional summer ranges and have to combine with other elk in other summer range areas on the mountain. This could compress elk use in other areas; however, this would be short-term (<5 years) as the sudden response from treatments would improve and increase the summer forage for elk. Hiding cover would be affected to some extent, but with the percentages designed to be left for goshawk foraging areas (40%), ample cover should be maintained. Elk depend on a balance of forage to cover ratios to fulfill a balanced life cycle. As stated, as large acres of treatment occur, elk would be displaced to other areas where they would combine use with other elk. This would compound the forage use in the shared area making it problematic to maintain healthy aspen regeneration. A need to reduce elk numbers may be requested from the UDWR to minimize impacts to aspen regeneration. Once the treated areas begin to respond and have reestablished a forage base, elk would return and utilize the area once again (<5 years). Indirect affects would be realized in other parts of the mountain as elk are dispersed from the treatments. Deer, cattle and sheep range may be impacted if dispersed elk use their normal summer ranges. However, this would be a short term issue as the treated areas offered ample opportunities for additional forage into the future. This cumulative response would mean a better summer range to raise young, and improve body condition for winter months.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to elk in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a temporary shift in spring, summer and fall elk use in the treatment areas. Once the understory has re-established elk find the burned areas very attractive. They have to learn to balance cover areas. Cover areas would be island left un-burned in the mosaic pattern. These should be left unburned to allow a future balance of cover to forage. Hunters are attracted to newly burned areas because big game are attracted to these areas. Increased harvest success would occur in treated areas as well as an increase in wounding loss. Overall, and in the longterm of large scale treatments such as this proposal, as mosaic patterns are part of the design, big game animals are expected to thrive on the mountain.  Cumulative effects for elk will be considered on National Forest System Lands (excluding BLM, State, or private) across the entire Monroe Mountain Unit since elk are migratory leaving summer range, transition range, and end up on winter range from November through April (depending length of winter condition).  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Mule Deer (Odocoileus hemionus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: The DWR collects post-season population data and monitors harvest levels and population trends of all big game species, such as mule deer. It should be noted that a hunting unit may be within approved herd unit objectives, and as a result of management strategies, population numbers may be reduced. The current and 5 year projected herd objective for Monroe Mountain is 8,000 deer. The unit is nearing herd unit objective (Table 12).  Hunting strategies in Utah are made through the Regional Advisory Council and Wildlife Board process. This process has been designed to involve the people in public meetings with a wide range of interests in Utah. Decisions for all hunting season bag limits and season dates are rendered based on political as well as biological input. This process demonstrates that the Forest Service does not control hunted game species in the State of Utah. Population fluctuations are the result of numerous influences including drought, cold winters, increased predation from large mammals, and habitat modifications and degradation. Although the numbers of young are recruited into the population are on a decline, the data show an increase in mature bucks into the population as well as an increase in buck to doe ratios.  The proposed project area is located at higher elevations that support summer range conditions for deer. A good balance of forage to cover ratios mixed with randomly dispersed water sources make the area ideal habitat for deer fawining and rearing, some deer rutting, and foraging in preparation for winter months.  A large portion of the proposed treatment area is in a 4B (managed for MIS) management stategy according to the Fishlake Land and Resource Management Plan. Cumulative effects for deer are discussed in the cumulative effects section.  According to UDWR data historical to current deer populations on Monroe Mountain are:  Table 12: Estimated deerpopulation on Monroe Mountain Management Unit (UDWR)  YEAR BUCK HARVEST POPULATION EST. 1938 356 2,700 1941 823 6,300 1950 815 6,300 1960 2,000 15,400 1970 1,600 12,300 1980 1,161 8,900 1992 871 6,700 7000 8000 9000 10000 11000 12000 13000 14000 15000 Deer Population Trend #29 Southwest Manti, #43 Salina-Boobe Hole, #44 Fishlake, #48 Monroe Mountain, #49 Marysvale-Circleville # 22 Spring Vehicle Count Routes Deer No. 2000 1,031 7,900 2010 252 4,900 2013  7,800 2014  7,300 Current Monroe Deer Plan Objective = 8,000     Chart 1: Deer trend data for Central Utah including Monroe Mountain (Greenwood 2014).  Chart 1 shows spring trend data of deer populations in Central Utah (Sevier, Piute, Wayne, So. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 DEER POSTSEASON TREND #29 Southwest Manti, #43 Salina-Boobe Hole, #44 Fishlake, #48 Monroe Mountain, #49 Marysvale-Circleville 50 Winter Vehicle Count Routes Fawns / 100 Does Bucks / 100 Does Sanpete). According to these data deer have peaked on an average of every 10 years.    Chart 2: Deer post-season trend data for Central Utah including Monroe Mountain (Greenwood 2013).  Chart 2 shows post-season trend data of deer populations in Central Utah (Sevier, Piute, Wayne, So. Sanpete). This chart shows buck to doe ratios and fawn to doe ratios. Data shows that buck to doe ratios are at an almost 30 year peak as well as fawn to do ratios.  Annual deer monitoring data has been gathered by the UDWR, BLM and USFS. Charts 1 and 2 represent data gathered by the BLM and USFS. The need to gather deer (MIS) data by Federal agencies is connected to their respective land management plans.  Post season deer data is gathered during the rut period (mid November-December) and when deer have migrated from the higher elevations to “transition” and “winter range” areas. A more accurate count is obtained during this time when deer are more concentrated and the highest number of bucks are found with the doe and fawn groups. Since the proposed project is designed in the higher elveations of Monroe Mountain, which is considered summer range, no winter range areas should be affected by the project. The UDWR has mapped deer winter range habitat for Monroe Mountain which is diplayed on Figure 6:  Figure 6: Map of Deer Winter Range for Monroe Mountain (UDWR database).  Direct effects to deer may occur during the implementation period when burning operations may cause some individuals to be burned over. They would also be driven from their cover areas and need to re-located to adjacent areas. Indirectly deer would compound use on other adjacent areas for cover and forage with other deer.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse impacts to habitat for late serial species, or improved habitat effectiveness on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative 1, no decrease in immediate habitat effectiveness for deer would occur. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may create decreases in habitat effectiveness on the quality of deer habitat over time as the variety of vegetation species is reduced as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain suitable until an uncharacteristic event occurs. The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of uncharacteristic wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it could create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today. The balance of forage to cover ratios would likely affect usable deer across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. This would cause deer to concentrate (on a short term basis 2-4 years) on other parts of Monroe Mountain which would compound effects to forage and space where other deer traditionally occupy.  This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and alter the type of forest that exist today providing optimum deer habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain; however, if this type of change occurred and the landscape had time to recover for a few years, deer would find the burned area attractive for forage consumption. A lack of cover would become an issue with fewer trees per acre.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  Seral and stable aspen are found within their spring, summer and fall life cycle areas. In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  Deer will fawn in an aspen-mountain brush dominated forest type, but will soon train their offspring to use the aspen, mixed-conifer and spruce-fir forest types as thermal and hiding cover. A balance of open meadows associated with cover (forested types) is an important combination for deer on the mountain.  Direct impacts for deer will occur when treatments occur. Deer studies on Monroe Mountain indicate that most of the fawning occurs on the fringe areas of the Forest (Freeman, 2014). They will be displaced from their traditional summer ranges and have to combine with other deer in other summer range areas on the mountain. This could compress deer use in other areas. However, this would be short-term (<5 years) as the sudden response from treatments would improve and increase the summer forage for deer. Hiding cover would be affected to some extent, but with the percentages designed to be left for goshawk foraging areas (40%), ample cover should be maintained. Indirect affects would be realized in other parts of the mountain as deer are dispersed from the treatments. Elk, cattle and sheep range may be impacted if dispersed deer used their normal summer ranges. However, this would be a short term (<5 years) issue as the treated areas would offer ample opportunities for additional forage into the future. This cumulative response would mean a better summer range to raise young, and improve body condition for winter months.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a temporary shift in spring, summer and fall deer use in the treatment areas. Once the understory has re-established deer find the burned areas very attractive. They have to learn to balance cover areas. Cover areas would be islands left un-burned in the mosaic pattern. These should be left unburned to allow a future balance of cover to forage. Hunters are attracted to newly burned areas because big game are attracted to these areas. Increased harvest success would occur in treated areas as well as an increase in wounding loss. Overall, and in the longterm of large scale treatments such as this proposal, as mosaic patterns are part of the design, big game animals are expected thrive on the mountain.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Cavity Nester Avian Group (Hairy Woodpecker, Western Bluebird, Mountain Bluebird, Williamson’s sapsucker)  Hairy Woodpecker (Picoides villosus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the Fishlake National Forest (FNF) since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. All other avian species that were detected during these surveys were also recorded while conducting birding routes. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1. In addition to these data, Utah State University has collected data across the Forest in aspen/conifer habitat types. Cavity nesting bird species were the focus of these efforts. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain nest cavities, prey, and cover for the woodpecker.  In addition to these data, the BBS database (https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/) displays a stable trend of Hairy woodpeckers in Utah (Chart 3). These data represent a 30-year trend between 1968 and 1998. These data were collected throughout the entire state of Utah, including points on the Fishlake National Forest.  (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled. Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population. On the Fishlake National Forest, a http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s03930UT.pnglarge portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Hairy woodpeckers.   Chart 3: Hairy woodpecker trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy) In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Hairy woodpeckers were observed during these survey efforts within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record. Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse effects on population numbers or viability of this species. Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative 1, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Hairy woodpecker. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have an effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. On the way to late successional stage forest conditions conifer encroachment into aspen forests would create a diversity of habitat components. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today, which provides optimum Hairy woodpecker foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. Woodpeckers are cyclic in nature and follow disturbance for foraging opportunities (see migratory bird section).  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  Cavity nesters use a range of aspen, mixed-conifer, and spruce fir to forage and develop cavities in trees for nesting. As Hairy woodpecker’s are also dependent on aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain, treatments in the “Seral” and “Stable” aspen treatments of a large scale will affect the distribution and use by Hairy woodpeckers in the proposed treatment areas. Many avian species, including several species designated as Sensitive Species by Federal and state agencies, depend on fire patterns for their dispersal and movements. Cavity-nesting birds, in particular, are often tied to fire-prone forests, and are responsive to fire and timber management activities (Saab, 2006). The effect to the group of cavity nesters will be directly related to the amount of trees thinned or burned in the proposed project area. Cavity nesters will be displaced, nest trees permanently damaged, and a few individuals may perish during implementation. The percentage of forested area that is required to be left unburned to meet the goshawk guidelines will cause a mosaic pattern of un-treated areas that displaced avian species will be able to use.  The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10- in migratory bird section). If the full amount of these percentages was treated and the Forest Plan standards related to snags was accomplished, the Hairy woodpecker populations would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a displacement of use by avian species found within the previous treatment areas. Displacement of avian species in treatments will be long-term (20-50 years for some and short term (1-5) for others. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for cavity nesters.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Western Bluebird (Sialia mexicana)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population. On the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Western bluebird. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s07670UT.pngremoved through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain nest cavities, prey, and cover for the Western bluebird.  In addition to these data, the BBS database (https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/) displays an upward trend of Western bluebirds in Utah (Chart 4). These data represent a 30-year trend between 1968 and 1998. These data were collected throughout the entire state of Utah, including points on the Fishlake National Forest.   Chart 4: Western bluebird trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy)  (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the FNF since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. All other avian species were also recorded while conducting survey routes. In addition to these data, Utah State University has collected data across the Forest in aspen/conifer habitat types. Cavity nesting bird species were the focus of these efforts. Trend studies continue in the area on an annual basis.  As a result of the data presented in this document, few locations have been monitored and additional monitoring sites should be identified. While the numbers collected on the Forest are somewhat static, data collected by the BBS indicate a sharp population increase in about 1985. Data presented by the Nature Conservancy demonstrate a "vulnerable" population in Utah. Considering all of the data presented in this document, as well as my professional judgment, this population is likely stable and viable across the Forest. Additional monitoring is needed to continue to evaluate the viability of this species. The Western bluebird in Utah has been ranked as ''vulnerable".  In 2001, 2002 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Western bluebirds were observed during these studies within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under this Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Western bluebird. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. On the way to late successional stage forest conditions conifer encroachment into aspen forests would create a diversity of habitat components. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today, which provides optimum Western bluebird foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. Cavity nesters are cyclic in nature and follow disturbance for foraging opportunities (see migratory bird section).  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  Cavity nesters use a range of aspen, mixed-conifer, and spruce fir to forage and develop cavities in trees for nesting. As Western bluebirds are also dependent on aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain, treatments in the “Seral” and “Stable” aspen will also affect the distribution and use by Western bluebirds in the proposed treatment areas. Many avian species, including several species designated as Sensitive Species by Federal and state agencies, depend on fire patterns for their dispersal and movements. Cavity-nesting birds, in particular, are often tied to fire-prone forests, and are responsive to fire and timber management activities (Saab et. al. 2006). The effects to the group of cavity nesters will be directly related to the amount of trees thinned or burned in the proposed project area. Cavity nesters will be displaced, nest trees permanently damaged, and a few individuals may perish during implementation. The percentage of forested area that is required to be left unburned to meet the goshawk guidelines will cause a mosaic pattern of un-treated areas that displaced avian species will be able to use.  The proposed percentage treated is of the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section). If the full amount of these percentages was treated and the Forest Plan standards related to snags was accomplished, the Western Bluebird populations would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a displacement of use by avian species found within the previous treatment areas. Displacement of avian species in treatments will be long-term (20-50 years for some and short term (1-5) for others. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for cavity nesters.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Mountain Bluebird (Sialia currucoides)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: The BBS database (https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/) displays an upward stable trend of the mountain bluebirds in Utah (Chart 5). These data represent a 30-year trend between 1968 and 1998. These data were collected throughout the entire state of Utah, including points on the Fishlake National Forest.  Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the FNF since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. All other avian species were also recorded while conducting survey routes. In addition to these data, Utah State University has collected data across the Forest in aspen/conifer habitat http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s04040UT.png  Chart 5: Mountain bluebird trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy) (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  types. Cavity nesting bird species were the focus of these efforts. Trend studies continue in the area on an annual basis.  Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population. On the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Mountain bluebird.  As a result of these data collected over the past years, as well as data collected during BBS, and the Nature Conservancy data, the trend for this species is stable to slightly up on the Forest.  Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain nest cavities, prey, and cover for the Mountain bluebird.  In 2011, 2012 and other years including 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Mountain bluebirds were observed during these studies within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record.  Field surveys for MIS/TES wildlife species recorded sightings of various cavity-nesting bird species in the proposed project area. Information in the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008) concludes that hairy woodpecker, western bluebird, and mountain bluebird species are stable and the populations are viable for the Fishlake NF and in the State of Utah. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under this Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Mountain bluebird. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. On the way to late successional stage forest conditions conifer encroachment into aspen forests would create a diversity of habitat components. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today, which provides optimum Mountain bluebird foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. Cavity nesters are cyclic in nature and follow disturbance for foraging opportunities (see migratory bird section).  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  Cavity nesters use a range of aspen, mixed-conifer, and spruce fir to forage and develop cavities in trees for nesting. As Mountain bluebirds are also dependent on aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain, treatments in the “Seral” and “Stable” aspen will also affect the distribution and use by Mountain bluebirds in the proposed treatment areas. Many avian species, including several species designated as Sensitive Species by Federal and state agencies, depend on fire patterns for their dispersal and movements. Cavity-nesting birds, in particular, are often tied to fire-prone forests, and are responsive to fire and timber management activities (Saab, et. al. 2006). The effect to the group of cavity nesters will be directly related to the amount of trees thinned or burned in the proposed project area. Cavity nesters will be displaced, nest trees permanently damaged, and a few individuals may perish during implementation. The percentage of forested area that is required to be left unburned to meet the goshawk guidelines will cause a mosaic pattern of un-treated areas that displaced avian species will be able to use.  The proposed percentage treated is of the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section). If the full amount of these percentages was treated and the Forest Plan standards related to snags was accomplished, the Mountain Bluebird populations would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments.     Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a displacement of use by avian species found within the previous treatment areas. Displacement of avian species in treatments will be long-term (20-50 years for some and short term (1-5) for others. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for cavity nesters.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Williamson’s sapsucker (Sphyrapicus thyroideus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population (Chart 6). On the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Williamson’s sapsucker. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain nest cavities, prey, and cover for the Williamson’s sapsucker.  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Williamson’s sapsucker’s were observed during these survey efforts within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record.  http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs11/s04021UT.png  Chart 6: Williamsen’s Sapsucker Trend Data (BBS and Nature Conservancy)  (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Williamson’s sapsucker. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. On the way to late successional stage forest conditions conifer encroachment into aspen forests would create a diversity of habitat components. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today, which provides optimum Williamson’s sapsucker foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. Cavity nesters are cyclic in nature and follow disturbance for foraging opportunities (see migratory bird section).  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area).  Cavity nesters use a range of aspen, mixed-conifer, and spruce fir to forage and develop cavities in trees for nesting. As Williamson’s sapsuckers are also dependent on aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain, treatments in the “Seral” and “Stable” aspen will also affect the distribution and use by Williamson’s sapsuckers in the proposed treatment areas. Many avian species, including several species designated as Sensitive Species by Federal and state agencies, depend on fire patterns for their dispersal and movements. Cavity-nesting birds, in particular, are often tied to fire-prone forests, and are responsive to fire and timber management activities (Saab et. al. 2006). The effect to the group of cavity nesters will be directly related to the amount of trees thinned or burned in the proposed project area. Cavity nesters will be displaced, nest trees permanently damaged, and a few individuals may perish during implementation. The percentage of forested area that is required to be left unburned to meet the goshawk guidelines will cause a mosaic pattern of un-treated areas that displaced avian species will be able to use.  The proposed percentage treated is of the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section). If the full amount of these percentages was treated and the Forest Plan standards related to snags was accomplished, the Williamson’s sapsucker populations would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a displacement of use by avian species found within the previous treatment areas. Displacement of avian species in treatments will be long-term (20-50 years for some and short term (1-5) for others. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for cavity nesters. Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Riparian Avian Group (Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, Song Sparrow)  Lincoln’s Sparrow (Melospiza lincolnii)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s05830UT.pngDirect and Indirect Effects: Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population (Chart 7). On the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Lincoln’s sparrow. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirectly riparian bird would realize positive benefits from the increase of insects in the area after the thinning and burning. Flowering plants and young vegetation would be improved following treatments. This would help attract insects in the immediate area for riparian avian species.   Chart 7: Lincoln’s Sparrow Trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy)  (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled. Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the FNF since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. The survey data is located in the project record.  Field surveys for MIS/TES wildlife species recorded sightings of various riparian-nesting bird species in the proposed project area. Information in the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008) concludes that Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, Song Sparrow species are stable and the populations are viable for the Fishlake NF and in the State of Utah. Riparian habitat within the project area is a very important part of the ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Careful consideration has been taken to create design features to help minimize impacts to riparian habitat. Design features specific to riparian areas, boreal toads, and Bonneville cutthroat trout are included in chapter 2 of the EIS. These riparian related design features are expected to also indirectly benefit and help minimize impacts to Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, and Song Sparrow. Acres of designated riparian habitat on Monroe Mountain as a whole are 1.7 percent (approximately 2,915 acres) (Figure 5). Not all of these 2,915 acres occur where active treatments are proposed. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under this Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Lincoln’s sparrow. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less than optimum for Lincoln’s sparrow foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  Since there are a minimum amount of riparian treatments proposed, it is assumed that individual avian riparian wildlife species may be directly impacted from such treatments. However, indirectly as the upland forested areas are treated minor increase water flows would be realized in the immediate downstream area (Campbell 2014 personal communication) (Solt 2014 personal communication). Seeps, bogs, and springs in the treatment zone, may see an increased water yield in the short-term (5- 10 years) which would enhance habitat for riparian birds and their prey. This reaction would improve localized riparian habitat. As aspen trees with their associated understories re-established in the treatment areas any increased water yield would be minimized over time. Since there would be such a minor amount of riparian area treated in the proposed project, and considering the riparian related design features, acreage affects to this species will not cause a downward trend in the local population or affect the viability of the Lincoln’s Sparrow.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight- seeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for avian species. Riparian areas will have minimal impact during implementation and over time riparian areas should improve as wild and domestic ungulate animals find new forage in the treated areas. This will help disperse grazing pressure from riparian areas to some degree.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.   Yellow Warbler (Dendroica petechial)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008). Direct and Indirect Effects: Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population (Chart 8). On the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Yellow warbler. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirectly riparian bird would realize positive benefits from the increase of insects in the area after the thinning and burning. Flowering plants and young vegetation would be improved following treatments. This would help attract insects in the immediate area for riparian avian species.  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Yellow warbler’s were observed during these survey efforts within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record.  The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the FNF since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. The survey data is located in the project record.  http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s06520UT.png Chart 8: Yellow Warbler Trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy) (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines.  Field surveys for MIS/TES wildlife species recorded sightings of various riparian-nesting bird species in the proposed project area. Information in the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008) concludes that Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, Song Sparrow species are stable and the populations are viable for the Fishlake NF and in the State of Utah. Riparian habitat within the project area is considered a very important part of the ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Careful consideration has been taken to create design features to help minimize impacts to riparian habitat. Design features specific to riparian areas, boreal toads, and Bonneville cutthroat trout are included in chapter 2 of the EIS. These riparian related design features are expected to also indirectly benefit and help minimize impacts to Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, and Song Sparrow. Acres of designated riparian habitat on Monroe Mountain as a whole are 1.7 percent (approximately 2,915 acres) (Figure 5). Not all of these 2,915 acres occur where active treatments are proposed. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under this Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Yellow Warbler. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less than optimum for Yellow Warbler foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  Since there are a minimum amount of riparian treatments proposed, it is assumed that individual avian riparian wildlife species may be directly impacted from such treatments. However, indirectly as the upland forested areas are treated minor increase water flows would be realized in the immediate downstream area (Campbell 2014 personal communication) (Solt 2014 personal communication). Seeps, bogs, and springs in the treatment zone, may see an increased water yield in the short-term (5- 10 years) which would enhance habitat for riparian birds and their prey. This reaction would improve localized riparian habitat. As aspen trees with their associated understories re-established in the treatment areas any increased water yield would be minimized over time. Since there would be such a minor amount of riparian area treated in the proposed project, and considering the riparian related design features, acreage affects to this species will not cause a downward trend in the local population or affect the viability of the Yellow Warbler.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for avian species. Riparian areas will have minimal impact during implementation and over time riparian areas should improve as wild and domestic ungulate animals find new forage in the treated areas. This will help disperse grazing pressure from riparian areas to some degree.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle. MacGillivray’s Warbler (Oporornis tolmiei) For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population (Chart 9). http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s06800UT.pngOn the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for MacGillivray’s Warbler. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirectly riparian bird would realize positive benefits from the increase of insects in the area after the thinning and burning. Flowering plants and young vegetation would be improved following treatments. This would help attract insects in the immediate area for riparian avian species.  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. MacGillivray’s warbler’s were observed during these survey efforts within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record.   Chart 9: MacGillivray’s Warbler Trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy)  (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the FNF since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. The survey data is located in the project record.  Field surveys for MIS/TES wildlife species recorded sightings of various riparian-nesting bird species in the proposed project area. Information in the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008) concludes that Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, Song Sparrow species are stable and the populations are viable for the Fishlake NF and in the State of Utah. Riparian habitat within the project area is considered a very important part of the ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Careful consideration has been taken to create design features to help minimize impacts to riparian habitat. Design features specific to riparian areas, boreal toads, and Bonneville cutthroat trout are included in chapter 2 of the EIS. These riparian related design features are expected to also indirectly benefit and help minimize impacts to Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, and Song Sparrow. Acres of designated riparian habitat on Monroe Mountain as a whole are 1.7 percent (approximately 2,915 acres) (Figure 5). Not all of these 2,915 acres occur where active treatments are proposed. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under this Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the MacGillivray’s warbler. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as aspen continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on such a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing optimum MacGillivray’s warbler foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning.  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  Since there are a minimum amount of riparian treatments proposed, it is assumed that individual avian riparian wildlife species may be directly impacted from such treatments. However, indirectly as the upland forested areas are treated minor increase water flows would be realized in the immediate downstream area (Campbell 2014 personal communication) (Solt 2014 personal communication). Seeps, bogs, and springs in the treatment zone, may see an increased water yield in the short-term (5- 10 years) which would enhance habitat for riparian birds and their prey. This reaction would improve localized riparian habitat. As aspen trees with their associated understories re-established in the treatment areas any increased water yield would be minimized over time. Since there would be such a minor amount of riparian area treated in the proposed project, and considering the riparian related design features, acreage affects to this species will not cause a downward trend in the local population or affect the viability of the MacGillivray’s Warbler.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight- seeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for avian species. Riparian areas will have minimal impact during implementation and over time riparian areas should improve as wild and domestic ungulate animals find new forage in the treated areas. This will help disperse grazing pressure from riparian areas to some degree.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Song Sparrow (Melospiza melodia)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: Data used in this analysis comes from several sources. It has been collected on the Forest by Forest Service staff. Additional data sources include: BBS data and Nature Conservancy. The combination of these data demonstrates a stable population (Chart 10). On the Fishlake National Forest, a large portion of forest habitats are potentially suitable and currently supply habitat for Song Sparrow. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirectly riparian bird would realize positive benefits from the increase of insects in the area after the thinning and burning. Flowering plants and young vegetation would be improved following treatments. This would help attract insects in the immediate area for riparian avian species.  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Song sparrow’s were observed during these survey efforts within the analysis area. The survey data is located in the project record.  The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  Surveys for avian MIS have been conducted on the FNF since the mid-1980s. Additional studies by "expert birders" were conducted on Monroe Mountain in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2011, 2012, and 2013. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting species, riparian species, and sage nesting species. The survey data is located in the project record.   http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s05810UT.png Chart 10: Song Sparrow Trend in Utah (BBS and Nature Conservancy) (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines.  Field surveys for MIS/TES wildlife species recorded sightings of various riparian-nesting bird species in the proposed project area. Information in the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008) concludes that Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, Song Sparrow species are stable and the populations are viable for the Fishlake NF and in the State of Utah. Riparian habitat within the project area is considered a very important part of the ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Careful consideration has been taken to create design features to help minimize impacts to riparian habitat. Design features specific to riparian areas, boreal toads, and Bonneville cutthroat trout are included in chapter 2 of the EIS. These riparian related design features are expected to also indirectly benefit and help minimize impacts to Lincoln’s Sparrow, Yellow Warbler, MacGillivray’s Warbler, and Song Sparrow. Acres of designated riparian habitat on Monroe Mountain as a whole are 1.7 percent (approximately 2,915 acres) (Figure 5). Not all of these 2,915 acres occur where active treatments are proposed. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under this Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Song sparrow. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as aspen continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on such a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing optimum Song sparrow foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  Since there are a minimum amount of riparian treatments proposed, it is assumed that individual avian riparian wildlife species may be directly impacted from such treatments. However, indirectly as the upland forested areas are treated minor increase water flows would be realized in the immediate downstream area (Campbell 2014 personal communication) (Solt 2014 personal communication). Seeps, bogs, and springs in the treatment zone, may see an increased water yield in the short-term (5- 10 years) which would enhance habitat for riparian birds and their prey. This reaction would improve localized riparian habitat. As aspen trees with their associated understories re-established in the treatment areas any increased water yield would be minimized over time. Since there would be such a minor amount of riparian area treated in the proposed project, and considering the riparian related design features, acreage affects to this species will not cause a downward trend in the local population or affect the viability of the Song Sparrow.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for avian species. Riparian areas will have minimal impact during implementation and over time riparian areas should improve as wild and domestic ungulate animals find new forage in the treated areas. This will help disperse grazing pressure from riparian areas to some degree.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  SAGEBRUSH OBLIGATE SPECIES (Brewer’s Sparrow, Sage Thrasher, and Vesper Sparrow)  Brewer’s Sparrow (Spizella breweri)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: In addition to these data, the BBS database (https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/) displays an upward trend of Brewer's sparrows in Utah (Chart http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s05620UT.png11). These data represent a 30-year trend between 1968 and 1998. These data were collected throughout the entire state of Utah, including points on the Fishlake National Forest. As vehicles traveled through suitable sagebrush habitat an individual sage nesting bird may get struck by a vehicle. This would be a direct effect. Indirect effects may occur if sagebrush habitat adjacent to the proposed forest treatment areas improved in habitat effectiveness. This may be due to some ungulate grazing pressure being re-distributed to the newly treated areas and taking some pressure off the sagebrush habitat.   Chart 11. Brewer's sparrow trend in (Utah BBS) (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific were conducted throughout the analysis area. These surveys have targeted cavity nesting, riparian, and sage nesting species. All other avian species were also recorded while conducting these surveys. Richfield Ranger District conducts trend surveys on specific routes as well as proposed project specific surveys for MIS birds.  As a result of these data collected over the past years, this species has increased in overall presence along transects across the Forest. While these numbers are increasing, they are few. We document this species in transects through sagebrush habitat across the Monroe Mountain landscape. We find common occurrences of this species that indicate a viable population on Monroe Mountain. The data from the BBS and the Nature Conservancy, which display an upward and an "apparently secure" rating. These data indicate the trend of this species across the Fishlake National Forest is stable to slightly up and is viable. Brewer’s sparrows were observed during these studies within the analysis area found in abundance. The survey data is located in the project record.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Brewer’s Sparrow. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as sagebrush continues to increase in density causing the understory of grass and forbs to diminish resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less than optimum for Brewer’s Sparrow foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  As noted in the discussion above this proposed treatment is designed for direct treatments in forested ecosystems, it is unlikely that many acres of sagebrush that contain sage-nester habitat would be affected. Some direct minor impacts may occur to sagebrush as equipment is used to go along the edge of sagebrush meadows to transport equipment or personnel for treatment implementation. Indirectly, vehicles traveling through sage habitat to and from project areas may cause dust and an occasional direct impact with a vehicle. None of these impacts pose a threat to the integrity of the habitat or viability of the Brewer’s Sparrow.  Cumulative Effects:  Sage nesters have experienced good habitat conditions in the past and are currently in good shape across the mountain. Sagebrush treatments have been monitored for trend as well as nontreated areas of sagebrush. Data gathered on the District for trend will help us monitor avian species over time. Cumulative effects from this proposed project are minimal if not unmeasurable because the treatments are designed to target forest systems and not sagebrush.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Vesper Sparrow (Pooecetes gramineus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  In addition to these data, the BBS database (https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/) displays a slight upward trend of vesper sparrows in Utah (Chart 12). These data represent a 30-year trend between 1968 and 1998. These data were collected throughout the entire state of Utah, including points on the Fishlake National Forest. As vehicles traveled through suitable sagebrush habitat an individual sage nesting bird may get struck by a vehicle. This would be a direct effect. http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s05400UT.pngIndirect effects may occur if sagebrush habitat adjacent to the proposed forest treatment areas improved in habitat effectiveness. This may be due to some ungulate grazing pressure being redistributed to the newly treated areas and taking pressure off the sagebrush habitat.  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Vesper sparrows were observed during these survey efforts within the analysis area. Vesper Sparrows are commonly seen on Monroe Mountain. The survey data is located in the project record.   Chart 12. Vesper sparrow trend in Utah (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.  The survey data is located in the project record.  Information in the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008) concludes that Brewer’s sparrow and vesper sparrow species are stable or in a slight upward trend, and these populations are viable for the Fishlake NF and in the State of Utah.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Vesper Sparrow. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as sagebrush continues to increase in density causing the understory of grass and forbs to diminish resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less than optimum for Vesper Sparrow foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  As noted in the discussion above this proposed treatment is designed for direct treatments in forested ecosystems, it is unlikely that many acres of sagebrush that contain sage-nester habitat would be affected. Some direct minor impacts may occur to sagebrush as equipment is used to go along the edge of sagebrush meadows to transport equipment or personnel for treatment implementation. Indirectly, vehicles traveling through sage habitat to and from project areas may cause dust and an occasional direct impact with a vehicle. None of these impacts pose a threat to the integrity of the habitat or viability of the Vesper Sparrow.  Cumulative Effects:  Sage nesters have experienced good habitat conditions in the past and are currently in good shape across the mountain. Sagebrush treatments have been monitored for trend as well as nontreated areas of sagebrush. Data gathered on the District for trend will help us monitor avian species over time. Cumulative effects from this proposed project are minimal if not unmeasurable because the treatments are designed to target forest systems and not sagebrush.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Sage Thrasher (Oreoscoptes montanus)  For a detailed description of the life history for this species refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Direct and Indirect Effects: In addition to these data, the BBS database (https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/) displays a recently slight upward trend of Sage thrasher in Utah (Chart 13). These data represent a 30-year trend between 1968 and 1998. These data were collected throughout the entire state of Utah, including points on the Fishlake National Forest. As vehicles traveled through suitable sagebrush habitat an individual sage nesting bird may get struck by a vehicle. This would be a direct effect. Indirect effects may occur if sagebrush habitat adjacent to the proposed forest treatment areas improved in habitat effectiveness. This may be due to some ungulate grazing pressure being re-distributed to the newly treated areas and taking some pressure off the sagebrush habitat. .  In 1994, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2011, 2012 and 2013 wildlife surveys specific to this project were conducted throughout the analysis area. Sage thrashers were observed during these survey efforts within the CEA area. Survey data is located in the project record. http://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs/graphs10/s07020UT.pngSage thrashers have been detected on the southern end of Monroe Mountain in the Hell’s Hole area. Jim Parrish, UDWR and Richard Wilkinson, USFS conducted the surveys.  Chart 13. Sage Thrasher Trend in Utah (BBS)  (Chart “Index” note: Hierarchical-model estimates of total percentage change from 1968 (Index) are shown as lines with year markers, and credible intervals are shown as lines. The indexes are relative abundance estimates for all years, estimated as yearly predicted abundances from the hierarchical model analysis. See (Sauer and Link, 2011, p. 89, col 2, para 4) for a precise definition of the indexes and an explanation of how the index modeling was compiled.     Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to the Sage Thrasher. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as sagebrush continues to increase in density causing the understory of grass and forbs to diminish resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less than optimum for Sage Thrasher foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  As noted in the discussion above this proposed treatment is designed for direct treatments in forested ecosystems, it is unlikely that many acres of sagebrush that contain sage-nester habitat would be affected. Some direct minor impacts may occur to sagebrush as equipment is used to go along the edge of sagebrush meadows to transport equipment or personnel for treatment implementation. Indirectly, vehicles traveling through sage habitat to and from project areas may cause dust and an occasional direct impact with a vehicle. None of these impacts pose a threat to the integrity of the habitat or viability of the Sage Thrasher.  Cumulative Effects:  Sage nesters have experienced good habitat conditions in the past and are currently in good shape across the mountain. Sagebrush treatments have been monitored for trend as well as nontreated areas of sagebrush. Data gathered on the District for trend will help us monitor avian species over time. Cumulative effects from this proposed project are minimal if not unmeasurable because the treatments are designed to target forest systems and not sagebrush.  Section 5 of this report is the describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Migratory Birds  The Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 decreed that all migratory birds and their parts are fully protected. This Act is the domestic law that affirms, or implements, the United States commitment to four international conventions (with Canada, Japan, Mexico, and Russia) for the protection of a shared migratory bird resource. Each of the conventions protected selected species of birds that are common to both countries (i.e., they occur in both countries at some point during their annual life cycle).  Under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, it is unlawful to take, kill, or possess migratory birds, their parts, nests, or eggs. Take is defined (50 CFR 10.12) as to pursue, hunt, shoot wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to pursue, hunt shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect.  Human intrusion, the mere presence of people in the environment, has become a dominant form of disturbance in many landscapes. Some forms of intrusion from recreationalists and other groups occur repeatedly and can seriously alter avian reproduction, survival, and habitat use. Accordingly, repeated intrusion has the potential to cause impacts that accumulate through time and that are manifested as progressive declines in avian richness and abundance (Riffell 1996).  One of the reasons Management Indicator Species (MIS) were identified was that these species would be representative of other species (Forest Plan II-28 through 31). MIS were selected to reflect the impacts of different management activities on wildlife. This concept can be applied to migratory birds since many MIS identified species are also migratory birds. As vehicles traveled through suitable sagebrush habitat an individual sage nesting bird may get struck by a vehicle. This would be a direct effect. Indirect effects may occur if sagebrush habitat adjacent to the proposed forest treatment areas improved in habitat effectiveness. This may be due to some ungulate grazing pressure being re-distributed to the newly treated areas.  Generally, forest structure and avian communities change rapidly after fire, depending on the severity of (Kotliar et al. 2002). Fire creates nesting and foraging habitat for birds by different mechanisms, but the process depends on pre-fire conditions, such as vegetation types, crown closure, and climate (Kotliar et al. 2002). During a fire, if soil temperatures stay below 175 °C, nutrient releases enhance plant growth and vigor (Agee 1993). This regrowth often leads to increased abundance of flowers, seeds, and insects, which brings in aerial insectivores, nectarivores, and seed eaters (Kotliar et al. 2002). Fire also creates logs and standing dead and dying trees that are susceptible to attack by bark (Scolytidae) and wood-boring (Cerambycidae and Buprestidae) beetles (Werner 2002), primary food sources for many woodpeckers. Large diameter (generally >23 cm diameter (http://www.rmrs.nau.edu/lab/ 4251/birdsnburns) at breast height [d.b.h.]) snags, trees with decay, and downed logs are particularly important because they are relatively easy for woodpeckers to excavate and they provide roosting, nesting, and foraging habitat for a variety of wildlife (Bull et al. 1997, Hall et al. 1997, Kreisel and Stein 1999, Scott 1979, Szaro et al. 1988). Snags, trees with decay, and downed logs are particularly important because they are relatively easy for woodpeckers to excavate and they provide roosting, nesting, and foraging habitat for a variety of wildlife (Bull et al. 1997, Hall et al. 1997, Kreisel and Stein 1999, Scott 1979, Szaro et al. 1988). Recently burned forests might also reduce populations of nest predators (Saab and Vierling 2001) such as tree squirrels (Tamiasciurus spp.) and weasels (Mustela spp.) because their habitats are altered or eliminated. Having fewer predators soon after fires likely allows for higher reproductive success and productivity of cavity-nesting birds (Saab and Vierling 2001).  Maintenance and recruitment of snags >23 cm d.b.h. is particularly important because these snags have greater longevity and provide wildlife habitat for a longer period than smaller snags (Chambers and Mast 2005, Russell et al. 2006). Additionally, retention of large diameter trees and snags is necessary for population persistence of cavity-nesting birds because these forest components are used disproportionately more for nesting and foraging than smaller trees and snags (Bull et al. 1997, Li and Martin 1991, Raphael and White, 1984). Large, older live trees also eventually provide dead wood substrates when they succumb to lightning strikes, beetle infestations, pathogens, or some combination thereof (Boucher et al. 2000). These trees are often referred to as “spike tops” or “living snags” because the tops and other portions of the trees are dead and provide opportunities for cavity excavation. In post fire habitats, management practices that retain dense stands of snags will also promote the longer term persistence of suitable nesting snags for cavity-nesting birds (Russell et al. 2006). Retention of snags <23 cm d.b.h. is also important because they provide valuable foraging substrate as well (Covert- Bratland et al. 2006).  Another important habitat element for wildlife is downed wood. Maintenance of large, downed wood is important ecologically because these structures provide foraging habitat, thermal cover, and concealment for many sensitive wildlife taxa, including reptiles, amphibians, mammals, and birds (Bull et al. 1997, Converse et al. 2006, Szaro et al. 1988). Downed wood can be consumed by low-severity burns depending on wood moistures and the timing of fires (Brown et al. 1985). If maintenance of downed wood is a management objective, seasonality of prescribed burning should be considered for times when moisture contents are higher and fire severity effects are lower (Thies et al. 2005).  The effect of fire on birds can be beneficial, neutral, mixed, or adverse depending on the species, length of time since fire, and burn severity. Generalizing the effect of fire on birds in western forests is challenging: short-term responses may differ from long-term responses, responses by resident bird species may differ from migratory species, and effects observed at the stand scale may differ from those at the regional or landscape scale. Also, fire that benefits one species may harm another. Ultimately, managing for particular fire conditions—including wildland fire, prescribed fire, or fire exclusion entails ecological tradeoffs among selected wildlife species and habitats (Saab 2007). The effects from thinning trees will create similar mixed effects on migratory birds.  Surveys for migratory birds on the Richfield Ranger District have been conducted and supervised by the same individual since the mid 90s up through the current season. Permanent routes were established and surveyed on a regular basis to establish “trend over time”. Survey’s specific to areas that are of special interest for proposed projects requiring full environmental analysis or specific habitat types that are of special interest that may target a particular species of concern. As our expert birder and his crew survey areas specific to NEPA requirements, regional protocols are used to gather data for target species. Surveys for migratory birds were conducted in conjunction with goshawk protocol surveys in forested areas. Migratory birds, MIS birds, mammals, were documented as grid transects were surveyed. There are many migratory bird species that inhabit the analysis area for a portion of their life cycle. Some birds that are MIS bird species are also migratory birds. These include: Mountain bluebird, Western bluebird, Brewer’s sparrow, Lincoln sparrow, Song sparrow, Vesper sparrow, Yellow warbler, and Hairy woodpecker. Eighty-seven different avian species have been identified within the proposed project area on Monroe Mountain. Other migratory birds inhabit parts of the analysis are for part of their life cycle. A list of bird species documented on Monroe Mountain can be located in Table 9 and Appendix 1.  Table 9: Avian species documented within the proposed project area (1994-2013).  1 American Coot 2 American Kestrel 3 American Robin 4 Bald Eagle 5 Belted Kingfisher 6 Black billed Magpie 7 Black capped Chickadee 8 Black chinned Hummingbird 9 Black crowned night Heron 10 Black headed Grosbeak 11 Brewer's Sparrow 12 Broad tailed Hummingbird 13 Brown Creeper 14 Brown headed Cowbird 15 Cassin's Finch 16 Chipping Sparrow 17 Clark's Nutcracker 18 Common Nighthawk 19 Common Raven 20 Cooper's Hawk 21 Cordilleran Flycatcher 22 Dark eyed Junco 23 Downy Woodpecker 24 Dusky Flycatcher 25 Dusky Grouse 26 Flammulated Owl 27 Fox Sparrow 28 Golden Eagle 29 Great blue Heron 30 Great horned Owl 31 Green tailed Towhee 32 Green winged Teal 33 Hairy Woodpecker 34 Hermit Thrush 35 House Finch 36 House Wren 37 Lazuli Bunting 38 Lincoln's Sparrow 39 Long eared Owl 40 MacGillivray’s Warbler 41 Mallard 42 Merlin 43 Mountain Bluebird 44 Mountain Chickadee 45 Mourning Dove 46 Northern Flicker 47 Northern Goshawk 48 Northern Harrier 49 Northern pygmy Owl 50 Northern roughed winged Swallow 51 Olive sided Flycatcher 52 Pine Siskin 53 Plumberous Vireo 54 Red breasted Nuthatch 55 Red Crossbill 56 Red napped Sapsucker 57 Red tailed Hawk 58 Red winged Blackbird 59 Rock Wren 60 Ruby crowned Kinglet 61 Ruffed Grouse 62 Rufus Hummingbird 63 Sage Grouse 64 Sage Thrasher 65 Sharp shinned Hawk 66 Song Sparrow 67 Spotted Sandpiper 68 Spotted Towhee 69 Steller's Jay 70 Three toed Woodpecker 71 Townsend's Solitaire 72 Tree Swallow 73 Turkey Vulture 74 Vesper Sparrow 75 Violet green Swallow 76 Virginia's Warbler 77 Warbling Vireo 78 Western Scrub Jay 79 Western Tanager 80 Western wood Pewee 81 White breasted Nuthatch 82 White crowned Sparrow 83 White throated Swift 84 Wild Turkey 85 Willow Flycatcher 86 Yellow rumped Warbler 87 Yellow Warbler  Note: Other migratory birds are also undoubtedly found within the analysis area. Direct and Indirect Effects: Avian studies on the Fishlake National Forest conducted by the Richfield Ranger District Wildlife Staff from 1990 to 2014 result in 136 different species (87 of which were located in the proposed project area). See Appendix 1 the General Bird List on the Fishlake National Forest from 1990 to 2014. Data have been collected by expert birders and UDWR avian specialists. We feel we have taken a hard look at the avian species and their respective habitat within Forest System lands on the Richfield Ranger District.  The key comparison element for evaluating how the alternatives affect migratory bird species is the amount of habitat affected (# of acres treated).  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the No Action Alternative were selected there would be no direct adverse or improved beneficial effects on population numbers or viability of these species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under Alternative, no adverse direct effects would be expected to migratory birds. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may have a negative effect on the quality of avian habitat over time and on a variety of prey species as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may allow indirect affect such as the reduction of habitat effectiveness as snags age and blow over and turn into down woody debris. Over time, as these landscapes continue to mature, prey species abundance would decrease as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and change the type of forest that exist today providing less than optimum migratory bird foraging habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain.  Effects of Alternatives 2-5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981- 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36% of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30-44% treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2-5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  In alternative 2, 39% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44% of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55% of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 10, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the Analysis Area). The proposed percentage treated is from the Vegetative Analysis Area as a whole (see Table 10-in migratory bird section).  Direct effects to migratory birds will be limited to forest dwelling and forest foraging species. Anytime fire or mechanical treatments occur in a forested landscape there is a risk for some direct impacts to individual birds. Design features and timing of implementation are important to minimize these effects. For example, as described in chapter 2 of the EIS, prescribed burning would usually not occur from May 15 through August 1st in the spruce/fir dominated areas, unless site specific surveys indicate that the species does not occur in the area. Avoiding the dates between the May 15 through August 1 timeframe will allow cavity nesting birds to complete their nesting, incubation, fledgling and dispersal portion of their life cycle for the season. The adults and young would be able to flee from dangerous conditions that fire may impose on them. To minimize impacts from mechanical treatments on cavity nesting birds found in a spruce-fir dominated forest type, thinning activities would usually commence after July 15 unless site specific surveys indicate that the species does not occur in the area. This timing would allow time for cavity nesting birds to complete their nesting and rearing season. Mechanical treatments provide the opportunity to selectively leave snags in groups or clumps throughout the site to provide a continuance of habitat features that are useable during and after the treatment. These design features provide protection (delayed timing of treatments in the season) of the nesting-rearing season while providing habitat features (leaving snags and clumps of trees and 40% non-treated forested areas throughout the project) needed for future viable populations on Monroe Mountain. Indirect effects may occur to migratory birds during implementation and post treatment from dust, prey availability immediately after treatment, collision and short-term (5-10 years) nest site availability. Enhancing habitat effectiveness would occur overtime as primary succession became established and habitat diversity increased.  Cumulative Effects:  Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a displacement of use by avian species found within the previous treatment areas. Displacement of avian species in treatments will be long-term (20-50 years for some and short term (1-5) for others. Over time the treatment areas will range from an early succession forested ecosystem to a late successional forested ecosystem providing a variety of life cycle opportunities for different species of avian birds. As the forest re-develops different prey species, different tree species and age classes of trees will provide opportunities that will enhance species viability for cavity nesters. Many other migratory birds use the forest types that are proposed for treatment. As an area is treated and has time to recover migratory birds will find added prey and nesting opportunities.  Section 5 of this report describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. This section also decscribes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur in the Monroe Mountain landscape. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.     Table 10: Vegetation affected by alternatives, percentage and acres treated compared to the analysis area. Compare Analysis Area to Forested Type Mechanical & Associated Slash Burning and Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned  Total Analysis Area Acres % of Analysis Area Proposed     Mixed Conifer----Alt. 2 2,607 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 12,241 31,129 39.3 Stable Aspen 8,820 17,009 51.9 Spruce-Fir 4,313 14,392 30.0 TOTAL 27,981 67,750 41.3 Mixed Conifer---Alt. 3 2,605 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 15,013 31,129 48.2 Stable Aspen 9,497 17,009 55.8 Spruce-Fir 5,348 14,392 37.2 TOTAL 32,461 67,750 47.9 Mixed Conifer---Alt. 4 2,609 5,220 50.0 Seral Aspen 17,150 31,129 55.1 Stable Aspen 10,146 17,009 59.7 Spruce-Fir 6,394 14,392 44.4 TOTAL 36,300 67,750 53.6 Mixed Conifer---Alt.5 2,605 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 13,742 31,129 44.1 Stable Aspen 9,406 17,009 55.3 Spruce-Fir 5,191 14,392 36.1 TOTAL 30,944 67,750 45.7         Discussion:  No loss of long-term (10 years plus) viability to migratory bird species is anticipated for the following reasons: 1) The vegetation treatments would be implemented in a mosaic pattern where 60% of the acres would be treated (27,981-36,300acres) within a 67,750-acre analysis area. 2) A prescribed burn would improve the foraging habitat for many of these species and nesting habitat for some species. 3) Fire would create a mosaic pattern of early seral plant species that would help create size, age, and species diversity important in maintaining functioning ecosystems and create or maintain habitat for various types of migratory birds. 4) No direct fire ignitions would occur during the nesting season (usually between May 15th and August 1st) in areas where cavity nesting birds such as Three-toed woodpeckers are found. Prescribed fire treatments that occur outside of the nesting season would have a beneficial effect on migratory birds by not interfering with breeding, nesting, and fledgling activities. Mechanical treatments would generally occur after July 15. (See “Effects of Alternatives 2-5” section for more information). 5) Snags would be left according to the forest plan guidelines and in clumps for species specific requirements (woodpeckers). 6) There are no adverse cumulative effects of this project on migratory birds (see cumulative effects section). 7) To help minimize impacts to migratory birds, coordination with the USFWS would occur as special circumstances arise.  Yellow-billed Cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus)  Dismissed for further analysis in Table 4. The project area is out of the elevational range and habitat type for Yellow-billed Cuckoos.  CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AREA  A cumulative effect analysis was presented on a species by species basis in sections 3 and 4 of this document. This section describes past, present and reasonably foreseeable vegetative treatments or disturbances as well as the size and rational for the area chosen for the CEA. The cumulative effects analysis area (CEA) consists of the area identified on the CEA map (Figure 5). This area was identified based on the species being evaluated in this report and also on their expected use during their presence of the analysis area. Wildlife are not stationary by nature or necessity. The CEA was chosen larger (175,706) than the analysis area (67,750) to provide a reasonable area where the species considered may use. The CEA includes known or predicted spring, summer, and/or fall use by the species analyzed within this document. The CEA consist of National Forest System lands as well as private or state lands within the USFS boundary of Monroe Mountain. Many species migrate from NFS lands in winter months to lands adjacent to the mountain or migrate to milder climates great distances from Monroe Mountain. For this reason we only include the FS border of Monroe Mountain.  Over the years many natural fires, prescribed fires, or mechanical treatments have occurred on Monroe Mountain with the intent to restore or enhance ecosystems. Most of those occurrences have been recorded as they have occurred and are found in this section. The past, present and reasonable foreseeable future actions include: (Some of these actions were summarized from Table 11 below)  • Approximately 1,962 acres of brush-saw fuels reduction work on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 6,194 acres of Dixie Harrow work on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 5,774 acres of mechanical harvest on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 19,774 acres of prescribed fire on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 12,895 acres being burned by wildfire on Monroe Mountain. • Approximately 2,077 acres of tree planting on Monroe Mountain. • Personal use Christmas tree sales on Monroe Mountain. • Personal use fuel-wood gathering on Monroe Mountain. • Private land development including new homes on Monroe Mountain. • Fuels reduction work on private lands • Recreational use – primarily hiking, horseback riding, mountain biking, OHV use, crosscountry skiing, hunting, fishing, and snowmobile use on Monroe Mountain. • Swift Springs Water Development Project • Monroe Mountain Livestock Management Improvement Project • Livestock grazing. • Livestock management adjustments under the purview of Forest Service administrative authorities found in 36 CFR 222.4. • Ongoing maintenance of existing range infrastructure; fences, troughs, waterlines, etc. • Ongoing maintenance of roads and trails.                     Table 11: Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Vegetation Related Actions on Monroe Mountain Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions on Monroe Mountain Name Type of Action Year Acres Blue Peak Brushsaw 2003 766 Durkee Fuels Brushsaw 2004 617 Thompson Basin Brushsaw 2007 579 085 Road Dixie Harrow 2000 22 Bagley North Dixie Harrow 1997 47 Bell Rock Dixie Harrow 1996 138 Big Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 133 Blue Peak Dixie Harrow 2003 766 Box Creek Dixie Harrow 1995 29 Box Creek Dixie Harrow 2003 104 Box Creek Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2008 156 Brindley Flat Dixie Harrow 2006 40 Burnt Flat Dixie Harrow 1995 96 Burnt Flat Dixie Harrow 1998 316 Dry Creek Dixie Harrow 2004 93 Durkee Springs Dixie Harrow 2004 466 Forshea Mountain Dixie Harrow 1999 65 Hells Hole Dixie Harrow 2004 132 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 14 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2004 89 Indian Peak Dixie Harrow 2006 95 Koosharem Dixie Harrow 2003 76 Little Table Dixie Harrow 1997 126 Rueben Burn Dixie Harrow 2004 155 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 1995 440 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 2003 265 Six Patch/Rock Springs Dixie Harrow 1995 109 Squaw Springs Dixie Harrow 1995 440 Thurber Fork Dixie Harrow 1998 570 Thurber Fork Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2009 461 Willis Spring Dixie Harrow 2005 176 Twin Peaks Dixie Harrow 2012 578 Big Flat Aspen 4,5 &6 Harvest 1983 4 Dry Creek –State Harvest 1999 151 Annabella Aspen II Harvest 2005 104 Doe Flat Harvest 1992 28 Forshea Harvest 1998 111 Indian Ranch Harvest 1969 47 Langdon Mountain Harvest 1969 17 Research Unit Harvest 1998 12 South Monument Asp. Harvest 1987 17 State Section 16 Harvest 1998 147 White Ledge Harvest 1997 36 White Ledge B Harvest 1998 71 Annabella Harvest 2001 234 Annabella Aspen 3 Harvest 2005 22 Buck Hollow Harvest 1994 24 Clover Flat Harvest 1989 186 Cove Mtn. Salvage II Harvest 1996 29 Cove Mtn. Salvage 1 Harvest 1993 9 Cove Mountain Harvest 2014 1,774 Dry Lake Harvest 1993 46 Langdon Harvest 1991 151 Lone Pine Harvest 1984 78 Lower Langdon Harvest 1984 82 Mill #10 Harvest 2003 162 Mill #11 Harvest 2001 68 Mill #11a Harvest 2003 68 Mill #8 Salvage Harvest 1999 10 Mill #9 Salvage Harvest 2000 52 Mill Creek Harvest 2000 274 Monroe Peak Harvest 1980 14 Monument Peak Salv. Harvest 1998 60 Monument Peak Salv.II Harvest 1999 131 North Clover Harvest 2011 191 Pole Canyon Harvest 1982 19 White Pine Harvest 2000 49 White Pine 2 Harvest 2002 61 Wooten Spring Harvest 1989 103 Mill 12 Harvest 2004 62 Box Creek Phase 1 Harvest 2012 386 Box Creek Phase 2 Harvest 2013 284 Monument Peak Harvest 2014 400 Monument Peak Prescribed Fire 2015 3,120 Box Creek Prescribed Fire 2012 650 Box Creek Prescribed Fire 2015 2,658 Twin Peaks Prescribed Fire 2014 5,169 Kinney Spring Prescribed Fire 1996 794 Greenwich Creek Prescribed Fire 1996 83 Burnt Flat Prescribed Fire 1983 359 Box Creek Prescribed Fire 1997 509 Little Table Prescribed Fire 1997 485 Bean Hill Prescribed Fire 1986 123 Shaeffers Prescribed Fire 1997 334 Jackie Canyon Prescribed Fire 1997 267 Rubens Prescribed Fire 2005 948 Deer Spring Prescribed Fire 1989 41 Buck Hollow Prescribed Fire 1989 18 Tuft Draw Prescribed Fire 1989 622 Deer Spring Prescribed Fire 1988 195 Pine Canyon Prescribed Fire 1996 434 Tibadore Pond Prescribed Fire 1988 669 Tibadore Pond Prescribed Fire 1989 387 Kingston Trough Prescribed Fire 1980 255 Forshea Prescribed Fire 1993 1,313 Thompson Basin Prescribed Fire 2009 180 Thompson Basin Prescribed Fire 2008 163 Annabella Wildfire 2006 573 Bald Knoll Wildfire 2003 68 Flat Wildfire 1997 5,505 Hell Hole Wildfire 1975 896 Killian Spring Wildfire 1990 407 Monroe Canyon Wildfire 1996 196 Monroe Mtn. Wildfire 1979 8 Monroe Mtn. Wildfire 1979 67 Oldroyd Wildfire 2000 1,329 Thompson Basin Wildfire 1996 103 Marysvale Peak Wildfire 2005 759 Blackbird Mine Wildfire 2006 1,463 Box Creek Wildfire 2012 1,520   Figure 7: Cumulative Effects Area Map for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project   Management Recommendations  • Permittees should follow allotment management plans to facilitate Forest Plan MIS population objectives. • USFS should coordinate with UDWR to manage big game populations to ensure success of treatments. The “Thresholds Document” should be followed post treatment. • Personnel responsible for implementation of prescribed burning or mechanical treatments should coordinate with the District Wildlife Biologist on timing, percentages for nontreatment within proposed areas, and avoidance areas, and areas of concern due to R4 Sensitive Species status (Goshawk territories, Flammulated owl habitat).  LITERATURE CITATIONS  Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire ecology of Pacific Northwest forests. Washington, DC: Island Press. 493 p.  Audubon. 2009. Bird watch list (Flammulated Owl). Available: http//www.audubon2.org  Boal, C. W.; Mannan, R. W. 1994. Northern goshawk diets in ponderosa pine forests on the Kaibab Plateau. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14-15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian Biology. Cooper Ornithological Society: 16: 97-102.  Breeding Bird Survey. 2006-2010 Trend Results for Fishlake National Forest area. Gooseberry: http://https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs//cgi-bin/rtena210.pl?85166 Fishlake NF area: http://https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs//cgi-bin/rtena210.pl?85115 Lost Creek Reservoir area: http://https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs//cgi-bin/rtena210.pl?85902 Saleratus Creek area: http://https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs//cgi-bin/rtena210.pl?85903 Richfield area: http://https://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/bbs//cgi-bin/rtena210.pl?85165 FNF Breeding Bird Route Map: http://nationalatlas.gov/mapmaker  Bright-Smith, D. J.; Mannan, R. W. 1994. Habitat use by breeding male northern goshawks in Northern Arizona. Studies in Avian Biology 16: 58-65. Brown, James K. 1975.  Boucher, Paul F.; Block, William M.; Benavidez, Gary V.; Wiebe, L. E. 2000. Implementing the expanded prescribed fire program on the Gila National Forest, New Mexico; implications for snag management. In: Moser, W. Keith; Moser, Cynthia E., eds. Fire and forest ecology: innovative silviculture and vegetation management. Tall Timbers Fire Ecology Conference Proceedings, No. 21. Tallahassee, FL: Tall Timbers Research Station: 104-113  Brown, J.K.; Marsden, M.A.; Ryan, K.C.; Reinhardt, E.D. 1985. Predicting duff and woody fuel consumed by prescribed fire in the Northern Rocky Mountains. Res. Pap. INT-337. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 23 p.  Bull, E.L.; Jackson, J.E. 1995. Pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus pileatus). No. 148. In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC: The American Ornithologists’ Union. Bull, E.L.; Parks, C.G.; Torgerson, T.R. 1997. Trees and logs important to wildlife in the interior Columbia River basin. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNWGTR-391. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 55 p.  Chambers, C.L.; Mast, J.N. 2005. Ponderosa pine snag dynamics and cavity excavation following wildfire in northern Arizona. Forest Ecology and Management. 216: 227–240.  Converse, S.J.; Block, W.M.; White, D.C. 2006. Small mammal population and habitat responses to forest thinning and prescribed fire. Forest Ecology and Management. 228: 263–273.  Corben, Chris. 2015. Acoustic Monitoring, Richfield Ranger District – Monroe Mountain USDA Forest Service, July 14 - July 31, 2014, Analysis Conducted and Report Written By Chris Corben, Titley Scientific – BatSense, 601 Business Loop 70W, suite 105, Columbia, MO 65203 January 30, 2015  Covert-Bratland, K.A.; Block, W.M.; Theimer, T.2006. Hairy woodpecker winter ecology in ponderosa pine forests representing different ages since wildfire. Journal of Wildlife Management.70: 1379–1392. Dahlgren, D.K., R. Chi, T.A. Messmer. 2006. Greater Sage-grouse Response to Sagebrush Management in Utah. Wildlife Society Bulletin 34(4):975-985. Fishlake National Forest (N.F.), Land and Resource(s) Management Plan (LRMP): Environmental Impact Statement. 1986.  Franklin, J.J.; Forman R.T.T. 1987. Creating landscape patterns by forest cutting: ecological consequences and principles. Landscape Ecology. 1:5-18.  Freeman, Eric D. 2014. R. T. Larsen, M. E. Peterson, C.R. Anderson Jr., K. R. Hershey, B.R. McMillian. Effects of Male-Biased Harvest on Mule Deer: Implications for Rates of Pregnancy, Synchrony, and Timing of Parturition. Wildlife Society Bulletin; DOI: 10.1002/wsb.450  Graham, Russell T.; Rodriguez, Ronald L.; Paulin, Kathleen M.; Player, Rodney L; Heap, Arlene P.; Williams, Richard. 1999. The northern goshawk in Utah: habitat assessment and management recommendations.  Greenwood, Larry. Annual Spring Deer Population Data 2014. Annual Post-season Deer Population data 2013. Bureau of Land Management Deer Database, Richfield B.L.M Field Office, 150 East 900 North Richfield, UT 84701  Hall, L.S.; Morrison, M.L.; Block, W.M. 1997. Songbird status and roles. In: Block, W.M.; Finch, D.M., eds. Songbird ecology in Southwestern ponderosa pine forests: a literature review. Gen. Tech. Rep.RM-GTR-292. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station: 69–88.  Kotliar, N.B.; Hejl, S.; Hutto, R.L.; Saab, V. Melcher, C.P.; McFadden, M.E. 2002. Effects of wildfire and post-fire salvage logging on avian communities in conifer-dominated forests of the Western United States. Studies in Avian Biology.25: 49–64. Kreisel, K.J.; Stein, S.J. 1999. Winter and summer bird use of burned and unburned coniferous forests. Wilson Bulletin. 111: 243–250.  Kreitzer, C., Proctor, J. 2006. Monroe Mountain-Hell’s Hole Sage Grouse Study-Final Report.  Lamberson, R. H.; McKelvey, R.; Noon, B. R.; Voss, C. 1992. A dynamic analysis of northern spotted owl viability in a fragmented forest landscape. Cons. Biol. 6(4):505-512.  Lehmkuhl, J. F., R. L. Everett, R. Schellhaas, P. Ohlson, D. Keenum, H. Riesterer, and D. Spurbeck. 2003. Cavities in snags along a wildfire chronosequence in eastern Washington. Journal of Wildlife Management, v. 67, no. 1, p. 219-228  Li, P.; Martin, T.E. 1991. Nest-site selection and nesting success of cavity-nesting birds in high elevation forest drainages. Auk. 108: 405–418.  Luce, R.J. and D. Keinath. (2007, October 31). Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum): a technical conservation assessment. [Online]. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/projects/scp/assessments/spottedbat.pdf [date of access-July 29, 2014]  McCarthy, C.; Carrier, W. D.; Laudenslayer, W. F. Jr. 1989. Coordinating timber management activities with raptor nesting habitat requirements. In: Pendleton, B. G., comp. Proceedings of western raptor management symposium. 229-235.  Moore, K. R.; Henny, C. J. 1983. Nest site characteristics of three coexisting Accipiter hawks in northeastern Oregon. Raptor Research. 17(3):65-76.  Nature Serve. 2006. Nature Serve Explorer An online encyclopedia of life [Brewer’s sparrow, Vesper Sparrow, sage thrasher, sage sparrow, mountain bluebird, western bluebird, hairy woodpecker, three-toed woodpecker, and Flammulated owl]. Version 1.8. Nature Serve, Arlington, Virginia. Available: http://www.natureserve.org/explorer  Nature Serve. 2009. Nature Serve Explorer: An online encyclopedia of life [Hairy woodpecker, Mountain bluebird, Western bluebird & Williamson’s sapsucker]. Version 7.0. Nature Serve, Arlington, Virginia. Available: http://www.natureserve.org/explorer  Parrish, J.R., F.P. Howe, R.E. Norvell. 2002. Utah Partners in Flight Avian Conservation Strategy Version 2.0. Utah Partners in Flight Program, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, 1594 West North Temple, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, UDWR Publication Number 02-27. pp 157-167.  Raphael, M. G; White, M; 1984. Use of snags by cavity-nesting birds in the Sierra Nevada Wildlife Monographs (ISSN:0084-0173) A Publication of The Wildlife Society, Jan. 1984. No. 86:1-66  Reynolds, R. T. 1983. Management of western coniferous forest habitat for nesting Accipiter hawks. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR- 102. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 7 p.  Reynolds, R. T.; Joy, S. M.; Leslie, D. G. 1994. Nest productivity, fidelity, and spacing of northern goshawks in Arizona. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14-15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian Biology. Cooper Ornithological Society; 16: 50-57.  Riffell, Samuel K. 1996. K. Gutzqiller, S. Anderson. Does human intrusion cause cumulative declines in avian richness and abundance? Ecological Applications 6(2), 1996 pp. 492-505.  Rodriguez, R.L. 2008. Life history and analysis of endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive and MIS species on the Fishlake National Forest. Version 4.1. Revised July 2006. Cedar City, UT. 152  Rodriguez, R.L. 2014. Personal communication regarding goshawk territories on Monroe Mountain.  Rohner, C.; Doyle, F. I. 1992. Food-stressed great horned owl kills adult goshawk: exceptional observation or community process? Journal of Raptor Research. 26:261-263.  Russell, R.E.; Saab, V.A.; Dudley, J.; Rotella, J.J.2006. Snag longevity in relation to wildfire and post fire salvage logging. Forest Ecology and Management. 232: 179–187.  Saab, Victoria.. L.Bate, J. lehmkuhl, B.Dickson, S. Story, S. Jentsch, and W. Block. 2006. Changes in downed wood and forest structure after prescribed fire in ponderosa pine forest. Proceedings of the /" Fire Behavior and Fuels Conference: Fuels Management-How to Measure Success, USDA RMRS-Proceedings, sponsored by the International Association of Wildland Fire, 28-30 March 2006, Portland, OR)  Saab, V.A.; Vierling, K. 2001. Reproductive success of Lewis’s woodpecker in burned pine and cottonwood riparian forests. Condor. 103: 491–501.  Saab, V.A.; Russell, R.E.; Dudley, J. 2007. Nest densities of cavity-nesting birds in relation to post fire salvage logging and time since fire. Condor.109: 97–108.  Saab, Victoria; Block, William; Russell, Robin; Lehmkuhl, John; Bate, Lisa; and White, Rachel 2007. Birds and burns of the interior West: descriptions, habitats, and management in western forests. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-712. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 23 p.  Sauer, J. R., J. E. Hines, and J. Fallon. 2010. The North American Breeding Bird Survey, Results and Analysis 1966 - 20010. Version 5.15.2008. USGS Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, Laurel, MD  Sauer, J. R., W.A. Link. 2011. Analysis of the North American Breeding Bird Survey Hierarchical Models. The Auk 128 (1):87-98, 2011. . USGS Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, Laurel, MD   Scott, V.E. 1979. Bird response to snag removal in ponderosa pine. Journal of Forestry. 77: 26– 28.  Szaro, R.C.; Severson, K.E.; Patton, D.R., eds. 1988.Management of amphibians, reptiles, and small mammals in North America. Gen. Tech. Rep.RM-GTR-166. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 458 p. Schmidt, Cheryl. 2003. Conservation Assessment for the Spotted Bat relative to the Black Hills National Forest South Dakota and Wyoming. USFS publication Rocky Mountain Region, Black Hills National Forest, Custer, South Dakota.  Spahr, R., L. Armstrong, D. Atwood, and M. Rath. 1991. Threatened, endangered, and sensitive species of the Intermountain Region. [American bald eagle, Spotted Bat, Townsend’s big-eared bat, Three-toed woodpecker, and Flammulated owl] Ogden, UT.  Squires, J. R.; Reynolds R.T. 1997. Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. Birds of North America, No. 298. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC.: The American Ornithologists' Union. 32 p.  Thies, W.G.; Westlind, D.J.; Loewen, M. 2005. Season of prescribed burn in ponderosa pine forests in eastern Oregon: impact on pine mortality. International Journal of Wildland Fire. 14: 223–231.  UDWR. 20011. Statewide Management Plan for Mule Deer. Available: http://wildlife.utah.gov/  UDWR. 20012. Statewide Management Plan for Elk. Available: http://wildlife.utah.gov/  UDWR. 2006. Utah Conservation Data. [Flammulated Owl]. Available: http://www.utahcdc.usu.edu/  UDWR. 2008. Utah Conservation Data. [Williamson’s Sapsucker]. Available: http://dwrcdc.nr.utah.gov  UDWR. 2008. Annual Report Parker Mountain Adaptive Resource Management Group (PARM). http://utahcbcp.org/files/uploads/parm/2008PARMDWRAnnualReport.pdf  UDWR. 2009. Wildlife Notebook Series No. 3. Bald Eagle  UDWR. 2015. Index of Available GIS Data--Wildlife habitat designation layers. http://dwrcdc.nr.utah.gov/ucdc/DownloadGIS/disclaim.htm  USDA Forest Service. 2000. Decision Notice Finding of No Significant Impact and Non- Significant Amendment of the Forest Plans in Utah for the Utah Northern Goshawk Project U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2009. Post-delisting Monitoring Plan for the Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) in the Contiguous 48 States. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Divisions of Endangered Species and Migratory Birds and State Programs, Midwest Regional Office, Twin Cities, Minnesota. 75 pp.  Utah Forest Restoration Working Group-Ecology Committee [Mary O’Brien, Paul Rogers, Kevin Muller, Rob MacWhorter, Allen Rowley, Bill Hopkin, Bill Christensen, Paul Dremann], 2010. Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah, Western Aspen Alliance, Utah State University, Logan, UT. 48 p.  Toone, R.A. 1993. General Inventory for Spotted Bats (Euderma maculatum) on the Wasatch Plateau, Manti-LaSal National Forest and the Old Woman Plateau and Thousand Lakes Mtn. Fishlake National Forest. Pages 4, 5 and 27.  USDA Forest Service. 1990. Forest Service Manual 2600 Wildlife, Fish, and Sensitive Plant Habitat Management WO Amendment 2600-90-1. Washington D.C.  Werner, R.A. 2002. Effect of ecosystem disturbance on diversity of bark and wood-boring beetles (Coleoptera: Scolytidae, Buprestidae, Cerambycidae) in white spruce (Picea glauca) ecosystems of Alaska. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-546. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 15 p.  Woodbridge, B.; Detrich, P. J. 1994. Territory occupancy and habitat patch size of northern goshawks in the southern Cascades of California. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14- 15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian biology. Cooper Ornithological Society 16: 83-87.  Zachel, C. R. 1985. Food habits, hunting activity, and post-fledgling behavior of northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis) in interior Alaska. Fairbanks: University of Alaska. 81 p. Thesis.  8.0 CONTRIBUTORS  • Kreig Rasmussen, Wildlife Biologist, USFS, Richfield, UT • Shane Greenwood, Wildlife Technician, USFS Richfield, UT • Richard Wilkinson, Wildlife Technician USFS Richfield, UT • Heidi Micklesen, Wildlife Technician, USFS Richfield, UT • Kyler Nielsen, Wildlife Technician, USFS, Richfield, UT • Rhett Peterson, Wildlife Technician, USFS, Richfield, UT 9.0 Appendix  Appendix 1. Avian species observed on Fishlake National Forest from 1990 to present.   COMMON NAME SCIENTIFIC NAME 1 American Coot Fuam 2 American Dipper Cime 3 American Goldfinch Catr 4 American Kestrel Fasp 5 American Robin Tumi 6 American Widgeon Anam 7 Bald Eagle Hale 8 Bank Swallow Riri 9 Barn Swallow Hiru 10 Belted Kingfisher Ceal 11 Bewick's Wren Thbe 12 Black billed Magpie Pihu 13 Black capped Chickadee Poat 14 Black chinned Hummingbird Aral 15 Black crowned night Heron Nyny 16 Black headed Grosbeak Phme 17 Black throated gray Warbler Deni 18 Black throated Sparrow Ambi 19 Blue gray Gnatbird Myci 20 Brewer's Blackbird Eucy 21 Brewer's Sparrow Spbr 22 Broad tailed Hummingbird Sepl 23 Brown Creeper Ceam 24 Brown headed Cowbird Moat 25 Bullock's Oriole Icbu 26 Bushtit Psmi 27 California Quail Caca 28 Canyon Wren Came 29 Cassin's Finch Caca 30 Cedar Waxwing Boce 31 Chipping Sparrow Sppa 32 Cinnamon Teal Ancy 33 Clark's Nutcracker Nuco 34 Cliff Swallow Pepy 35 Common Nighthawk Chmi 36 Common Raven Coco 37 Common Snipe Gaga 38 Cooper's Hawk Acco 39 Cordilleran Flycatcher Epoc 40 Dark eyed Junco Juhy 41 Downy Woodpecker Pipu 42 Dusky Flycatcher Emob 43 Dusky Grouse Deob 44 Eurasian Widgeon Anpe 45 Europeon Starling Stvu 46 Evening Grosbeak Cove 47 Ferruginous Hawk Bure 48 Flammulated Owl Otfl 49 Fox Sparrow Pail 50 Gadwall Anst 51 Golden Eagle Agch 52 Gray Catbird Duca 53 Gray Flycatcher Emwr 54 Gray Jay Peca 55 Gray Vireo Vivi 56 Great blue Heron Arhe 57 Great horned Owl Buvi 58 Green tailed Towhee Pich 59 Green winged Teal Ancr 60 Hairy Woodpecker Pivi 61 Hermit Thrush Cagu 62 House Finch Came 63 House Wren Trae 64 Juniper Titmouse Bari 65 Killdeer Chvo 66 Lark Sparrow Chgr 67 Lazuli Bunting Paam 68 Lesser Goldfinch Caps 69 Lesser Scaup Ayaf 70 Lincoln's Sparrow Meli 71 Long eared Owl Asot 72 Macgillivray's Warbler Opto 73 Mallard Anpl 74 Merlin Faco 75 Mountain Bluebird Sicu 76 Mountain Chickadee Poga 77 Mourning Dove Zema 78 Northern Flicker Coau 79 Northern Goshawk Acge 80 Northern Harrier Cicy 81 Northern Mockingbird Mipo 82 Northern pygmy Owl Glgn 83 Northern roughed winged Swallow Stse 84 Olive sided Flycatcher Coco 85 Osprey Paha 86 Pine Siskin Capi 87 Pintail Anac 88 Pinyon Jay Gycy 89 Plumbeous Vireo Vipl 90 Red Breasted Nuthatch Sica 91 Red Crossbill Locu 92 Red naped Sapsucker Spnu 93 Red tailed Hawk Buja 94 Red winged Blackbird Agph 95 Ring necked Duck Ayco 96 Rock Dove Coli 97 Rock Wren Saob 98 Ruby crowned Kinglet Reca 99 Ruffed Grouse Baum 100 Rufous Hummingbird Seru 101 Sage Grouse Ceur 102 Sage Thrasher Ormo 103 Sharp shinned Hawk Acst 104 Song Sparrow Meme 105 Sora Rail Poca 106 Spotted Sandpiper Acma 107 Spotted Towhee Pima 108 Steller's Jay Cyst 109 Swainson's Hawk Busw 110 Swainson's Thrush Caus 111 Three toed Woodpecker Pitr 112 Townsend's Solitaire Myto 113 Tree Swallow Tabi 114 Turkey Vulture Caau 115 Vesper Sparrow Pogr 116 Violet green Swallow Tath 117 Virginia Rail Rali 118 Virginia's Warbler Vevi 119 Warbling Vireo Vigi 120 Western Bluebird Sime 121 Western Grebe Aeoc 122 Western Kingbird Tyve 123 Western Meadowlark Stne 124 Western Scrub Jay Apca 125 Western Tanager Pilu 126 Western wood Pewee Coso 127 White breasted Nuthatch Sica 128 White crowned Sparrow Zole 129 White throated Swift Aesa 130 Wild Turkey Mega 131 Williamson's Sapsucker Spth 132 Willow Flycatcher Emtr 133 Wilson's Warbler Wipu 134 Yellow breasted Chat Icui 135 Yellow rumped Warbler Deco 136 Yellow Warbler Depe    Appendix Q – Wildlife Biological Assessment and Evaluation   I. Introduction  This Biological Assessment (BA) has been prepared to document analysis of the potental direct, indirect, and cumulative effects on any Federally-listed threatened, endangered, proposed, and candidate species known or expected to occur within the project area. This BA addresses potential effects to Utah prairie dog, California condor, and Yellow-billed cuckoo.  This BA was prepared in accordance with Forest Service Manual (FSM) direction 2672.42 and meets legal requirments set forth under section 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, and implementing regulations [19 U.S.C. 1536 (c, 50 CFR 402.12 (f) and 402.14 (c)].  II. Consultation  We are instructed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Field Office, Salt Lake City, Utah to query their current species list database by county. We are to use this information when preparing Biological Assessments to help determine which species are currently on their list and need to be considered when doing environmental analysis. This proposed project falls within the boundaries of Sevier and Piute counties. Section VIII list the July 1, 2015 threatened, endangered, proposed, and candidate wildlife species found on the USFWS Utah Field Office website for Sevier and Piute counties.  III. Background  The Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project is a result of several years of planning and collaboration among interested parties, groups and organizations, and Federal, State and local government agencies. In January 2010, the Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group (UFRWG) finalized the 2010 Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah. As part of this effort, the UFRWG submitted a call for project proposals that could effectively test the newly created guidelines. The Fishlake National Forest submitted the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to the UFRWG for their consideration. The proposal was accepted and in April 2011, the UFRWG created the Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG) to provide recommendations and feedback to the District as the project was being developed. Since its inception, the District has met with the MMWG almost monthly since May 2011. These meetings were open to the public to provide information, ask and answer questions, and discuss the proposed action and alternatives.  The MMWG consist of the following stakeholders: Utah Cattlemen’s Association; Utah Woolgrowers Association; Utah State University Extension; Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife; Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation; Trout Unlimited; Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR); Piute County Commission; Sevier County Commission; Utah Department of Agriculture and Food; Utah Farm Bureau; Rocky Mountain Research Station; Grand Canyon Trust; Western Aspen Alliance; and Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands.        IV. Purpose and Need  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described in the FEIS. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain.  V. Project Description  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. The area affected by the proposal includes Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings (Map 1). To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. See the FEIS for additional information regarding background, existing conditions, desired conditions, and purpose & need.  VI. Decision  As described in the Record of Decision (ROD) for the Monroe Mountain Ecosystems Restoration Project, the following is a summary of what will occur:  • Approximately 14,828 acres will be mechanically treated. • Approximately 25,991 acres will be treated with prescribed fire. • Approximately 12.1 miles of temporary roads will be built and re-habed after project completion. • Approximatley 633 acres and 7.2 miles of temporary fence will be built around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake to protect treatment areas. • Aspen browse tresholds and response options will be implemented to ensure aspen regeneration successfully recruits. • Several design features will be implemented to help minimize impacts to Northern goshawk, Flammulated owls, Bonneville cutthroat trout, migratory birds, boreal toads, etc. • Implementation will occur over a period of approximatley 10 years.  The Wildlife Specialist Report completed for this project analyzes the effects from the no action alternative (alternative 1) and four action alternatives (alternatives 2-5). The total treatment acres described in the ROD are less than what was analyzed for with alternatives 2-5 in the Wildlife Specialist Report. Alternatives 2-5 all proposed more acres to be treated that what is described in the ROD.  For additional information see the Record of Decision and FEIS.    Map 1: Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project VII. Current Management Direction  Current management direction for threatened, endangered, proposed, and candidate species on the Fishlake National Forest can be found in the following documents, filed at the Richfield Ranger District:  -Forest Service Manual and Handbooks (FSM/H 2670) -National Forest Management Act (NFMA) -Endangered Species Act (ESA) -National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) -Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) -Utah Prairie Dog Recovery Plan -California Condor Recovery Plan  VIII. Species Evaluated for the Biological Assessment  The list below includes threatened, endangered, proposed, and candidate species that are known to occur in Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah and are considered in this document.                                Table 1: List of Threatened (T), Endangered (E), Proposed (P), and Candidate (C) Species. SPECIES Scientific Name   STATUS SUITABLE HABITAT HABITAT UNSUITABILITY BASED ON: SPECIES  TO BE ANALYZED FURTHER Y OR N  Utah Prairie Dog Cynomys parvidens   T  No  Short-grass prairie type preferred by prairie dogs does not occur in the project area. No prairie dog colonies.  No California Condor (4) Gymnogyps californianus   E  No  Project area lacks the rock cliff habitat preferred by California condors. Trees are present for perching. Carrion may be present at times for foraging.  Yes  Yellow-billed Cuckoo  Coccyzus americanus   T  No  Riparian habitat of cottonwood and willow below 6500 feet are not found within the project area.  No Greater Sage Grouse Centrocercus urophasianus C & Sensitive Yes Suitable Sage grouse habitat is found in the analysis area. Sagebrush is not a targeted vegetation species for treatment in this project (see Wildlife Specialist Report and Biological Evaluation). Yes  Utah Prairie Dog (Cynomys parvidens) As stated above (Table 1), the project area lacks the suitable habitat needed for this species.  California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus) This project lies south of I-70 and is therefore within the 10j experimental non-essential area for the California condor. For more information on life histories and habitat accounts, refer to “Life History and Analysis of Endangered, Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest” (Rodriguez 2006). This document is hereby incorporated by reference.  Greater Sage Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) The Greater sage grouse is a Candidate species known to occur in Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah. The Greater sage grouse is discussed and analyzed for affects in the Biological Evaluation because it is a current Forest Service Region 4 Sensitive Species. The Greater sage grouse analysis is also found in the Wildlife Specialist Report and the final determination is listed in the Biological Evaluation for this project.  Yellow-billed cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus) As stated above in Table 1, the project area is outside of the elevational range and habitat type for Yellow-billed Cuckoos.  IX. Analysis Process  As a part of this project, an assessment of possible impacts to the species mentioned above was conducted and is disclosed in the Wildlife Specialist Report. The project area was assessed for possible impacts to threatened, endangered, proposed, and candidate wildlife species known to occur in Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah. Table 1 lists the wildlife species in these two counties that are identified as threatened, endangered, proposed, or candidate. Table 1 shows the status of those wildlife species along with identification of habitat suitability within the project boundaries for the proposed action.  The techniques and methodologies used in this analysis are considered the best available science because the analysis includes a summary of the credible scientific evidence which is relevant to evaluating reasonably foreseeable adverse impacts.  The best available science is a composite of several key elements. The elements of science used are:  • On-site data and history. District records and the corporate GIS database were reviewed for sightings and potentially suitable habitat for each species.  • Scientific literature. Literature reviewed and cited is listed in the appendix and included within the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2006).  • Professional knowledge, judgment and experience. The primary specialist that conducted this analysis was Kreig Rasmussen, Richfield Ranger District Wildlife Biologist (23 years). Expert birder, Richard Wilkinson has worked summers for approximately 20 years to survey and record bird species around the Richfield Ranger District. Other wildlife technicians have worked several consecutive years on the RRD and helped enhance the collective database. The collective professional knowledge of the project area, judgment of how to integrate science with local conditions and the experience gained from implementation of other projects have been incorporated into the analysis.  • Project specific wildlife surveys were conducted during summer months of 2012-2014 with other surveys being conducted previous years. Monroe Mountain, including the project area, has been surveyed in select areas multiple times over the past 15-20 years to delvelop a baseline and trend data set. These surveys have also targeted the species listed above and their habitat.       X. Effects Analysis and Determinations (see Wildlife Specialist Report for detailed analysis)  Utah Prairie Dog (Cynomys parvidens) There will be no direct, indirect, or cumulative effects to Utah prairie dogs or their habiat as a result of implementing the decision. The project area lacks the suitable habitat needed for this species. No prairie dog colonies occur at the present or historically in the project area.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the proposed action for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project will have “No Effect” on the Utah prairie dog or their habitat. As stated above, the project area lacks the suitable habitat needed for this species.  California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus) Direct and Indirect Effects: Implementation of the decision (mechanical and prescribed fire) would alter vegetation. These impacts would result in a decrease in some trees (live and dead) that condors could perch on; however, fire would also be creating more standing dead trees and open up some of the landscape for foraging. It is expected that opening parts of this landscape would increase the potential for condors to find and scavenge on carrion. The increased source of carrion would offset the reductions of potential perching habitat. In addition, the landscape provides abundant perching opportunities. These effects would displace condor use from one area to another within the same landscape as this landscape provides excellent perching habitat, and the decision will increase foraging potential. An indirect impact of the decision may result in more available food. With increased hunter success more potential for food could be available throughout the landscape.  This project lies south of I-70 and is therefore within the 10j experimental non-essential area for the California condor. The project area lacks the abundance of rock cliff habitat needed by this species; however, the area does contain large trees for perching. There have been no sightings at the present time or historical of this species on Monroe Mountain. Since this species does not utilize Monroe Mountain for any of it’s life cyle (based on current knowledge) the writer of this document would determine the decision would have minimal to no affect on individuals or the viablitly of the species.  Because no California condor has been documented to occur on the Richfield Ranger District, impacts from the decision would be negligible and difficult to detect. Any effect discussed in this section may only occur if condor populations spread north and developed on the Forest.  The decision consists of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. While implementation actions would not likely impact the California condor, the effects of the treatments could impact the bird (if they migrated to the Fishlake National Forest (FNF)) and its habitat. It is common for California condor to prey on the carcasses of un-recovered big game animals from hunting season or the parts of a harvested big game animal left from field dressing. Also included in this are fish that have either died or parts of fish that have been left behind after cleaning. They are also found utilizing the carcasses of dead livestock animals that have expired for unknown reasons on the summer range. As treatments are conducted and big game animals attracted to them, a higher number of hunters would hunt treated areas to take advantage of higher concentrations of big game species. As a result, the potential for habitat enhancement by increasing foraging habitat for some potential prey species is high with the decision. As a result, treatments to enhance the California condor occupancy are not crucial to manage for a sustainable population of condor on the Forest. Based on this analysis, implementation of this decision would impact perching and roosting habitat in varying degrees but would not impact the species adversely by modifying any one of the primarily habitat components necessary for persistence of the species on the Fishlake National Forest. As more acres are treated more opportunities for carrion and prey would be made available to California condor.  Cumulative Effects:  Effects to the Condor over time and from the previous actions on Monroe Mountain will be minimal. Because there is little habitat features to support this species it is unlikely the mountain would support a viable population. Past, present and future habitat improvement projects would help provide opportunites in the form of prey. They depend on carrion (dead animal carcasses) for food. Prey would come in a slight increase of dead animals in the treatment areas. This increase could come from a higher number of wildlife and domestic animals being attracted to the site due to improved vegetative conditions. Animals may inadvertenly die there or be wounded from a hunter, not located and retrieved.  Section 5 in the Wildlife Specialist Report describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project will have minimal effect on their habitat, therefore I will make a nonjeopardy determination concerning this project as it lies south of I-70 and is therefore within the 10j experimental non-essential area for the California condor. As stated above, the project area lacks the rock cliff habitat needed by this species. I do have a “may affect, but is not likely to adversely affect” on the California condor as the project may benefit them in added foraging opportunities from gut piles as hunters harvest big game in newly treated areas.  Yellow-billed Cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus) There will be no direct, indirect, or cumulative effects to Yellow-billed Cuckoo or their habiat as a result of implementing the decision. The project area lacks the suitable habitat needed for this species. Riparian habitat of cottonwood and willow below 6,500 feet are not found within the project area.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project will have “No Effect” on the Yellow-billed cuckoo or their habitat. As stated above, the project area lacks the suitable habitat needed for this species.          XI. LITERATURE CITED   Rasmussen, Kreig M. 2015 Wildlife Specialist Report, Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project.  Rodriguez, R.L. 2006. Life history and analysis of endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive, and MIS species on the Fishlake National Forest. Version 4.1. Revised April 2006. Cedar City, UT. 145 pp.  US Fish and Wildlife Service Section 7 Consultation Guidance for Preparing a Biological Assessment http://www.fws.gov/midwest/Endangered/section7/ba_guide.html  US Fish and Wildlife Service, Recovery Plan for the California Condor 1996  http://www.fws.gov/hoppermountain/CACORecoveryProgram/PDF%20Fact%20Sheets/Recover y%20Plan%20for%20the%20California%20Condor,%20April%201996.pdf  US Fish and Wildlife Service, Recovery Plan for the Utah Prairie Dog 1991, Revised March 2012  http://www.fws.gov/mountainprairie/species/mammals/UTprairiedog/2012MarchRevisedRecoveryPlan_Final.pdf  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2009. Post-delisting Monitoring Plan for the Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) in the Contiguous 48 States. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Divisions of Endangered Species and Migratory Birds and State Programs, Midwest Regional Office, Twin Cities, Minnesota. 75 pp.  XII. CONTRIBUTORS  • Richard Wilkinson, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Heidi Mickelsen, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Shane Greenwood, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Kreig Rasmussen, District Wildlife Biologist, Richfield Ranger District • Ron Rodriguez, Wildlife Biologist, Wildlife Program Lead, Dixie-Fishlake N.F.   I. Introduction  This Biological Evaluation (BE) has been prepared to analyze potential effects of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project on wildlife species designated as Sensitive by the 1995 United States Forest Service Region 4 Sensitive Species List (updated in 1998 , 2003 and 2013). This BE addresses whether the decision will impact a species that may result in a loss of viability of the species, or cause sensitive species to trend toward federal listing.  II. Background  The Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project is a result of several years of planning and collaboration among interested parties, groups and organizations, and Federal, State and local government agencies. In January 2010, the Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group (UFRWG) finalized the 2010 Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah. As part of this effort, the UFRWG submitted a call for project proposals that could effectively test the newly created guidelines. The Fishlake National Forest submitted the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to the UFRWG for their consideration. The proposal was accepted and in April 2011, the UFRWG created the Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG) to provide recommendations and feedback to the District as the project was being developed. Since its inception, the District has met with the MMWG almost monthly since May 2011. These meetings were open to the public to provide information, ask and answer questions, and discuss the proposed action and alternatives. The MMWG consist of the following stakeholders: Utah Cattlemen’s Association; Utah Woolgrowers Association; Utah State University Extension; Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife; Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation; Trout Unlimited; Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR); Piute County Commission; Sevier County Commission; Utah Department of Agriculture and Food; Utah Farm Bureau; Rocky Mountain Research Station; Grand Canyon Trust; Western Aspen Alliance; and Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands. III. Purpose and Need  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described in the Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS). To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. IV. Project Description  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. The area affected by the proposal includes Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings (Map 1). To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. See the FEIS for additional information regarding background, existing conditions, desired conditions, and purpose & need. V. Decision  As described in the Record of Decision (ROD) for the Monroe Mountain Ecosystems Restoration Project, the decision is to implement alternative 5 with the following modifications: (1) no treatments will occur in Northern goshawk Post Fledgling Areas (PFAs) and Nest Areas (NAs), and (2) the 2.6 miles of temporary roads near Barney Lake will not be constructed. The following is a summary of what will occur: • Approximately 14,828 acres will be mechanically treated. • Approximately 25,991 acres will be treated with prescribed fire. • Approximately 12.1 miles of temporary roads will be built and re-habed after project completion. • Approximatley 633 acres and 7.2 miles of temporary fence will be built around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake to protect treatment areas. • Aspen browse tresholds and response options will be implemented to ensure aspen regeneration successfully recruits. • Several design features will be implemented to help minimize impacts to Northern goshawk, Flammulated owls, Bonneville cutthroat trout, migratory birds, boreal toads, etc. • Implementation will occur over a period of approximatley 10 years. The Wildlife Specialist Report completed for this project analyzes the effects from the no action alternative (alternative 1) and four action alternatives (alternatives 2-5). The total treatment acres described in the ROD are less than what was analyzed for with alternatives 2-5 in the Wildlife Specialist Report. Alternatives 2-5 all proposed more acres to be treated that what is described in the ROD. For additional information see the Record of Decision and FEIS.   Map 1: Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project  VI. Current Management Direction  Current management direction on desired conditions for Sensitive species on the Fishlake National Forest can be found in the following documents, filed at the Richfield Ranger District: -Forest Service Manual and Handbooks (FSM/H 2670) -National Forest Management Act (NFMA) -National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) -Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) -Intermountain Region (R4) Sensitive Species List -Northern Goshawk Fishlake Forest Plan Amendment -Utah Northern Goshawk Recovery Plan -Bald Eagle Recovery Plan -Greater Sage grouse   VII. Species Evaluated for the Biological Evaluation The below list includes the United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service Regional Forester’s (R4) wildlife sensitive species (November 1995 list, updated in 1999, 2003 and 2013) known to occur or potential habitat occurs on the Richfield Ranger District, Monroe Mountain. WILDLIFE Bighorn Sheep (Ovis Canadensis) Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) Pygmy Rabbit (Brachylagus idahoensis) Greater Sage Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) Townsend’s big-eared bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) Spotted bat (Euderma maculatum) Peregrine Falcon (Falco peregrinus anatum) Three-toed woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) Flammulated owl (Otus flammeolus)   VIII. Species Accounts This section includes a summary review of the species that have suitable habitat or are known to occur within the project area. For more information on life histories and habitat accounts, refer to “Life History and Analysis of Endangered, Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest” (Rodriguez 2006). This document is incorporated here by reference.         Table 1. Status of wildlife Sensitive (S) species or their habitat known or suspected to occur on the Fishlake National Forest  SPECIES Scientific Name   STATUS SUITABLE HABITAT HABITAT UNSUITABILITY BASED ON: SPECIES ANALYZED FURTHER Y OR N  Bighorn Sheep Ovis Canadensis   S  No  Contiguous acres of cliff face habitat lacking.  No Bald Eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus  S  Yes  Bald eagles migrate to the project area during the winter (Nov-Mar). Habitat used by eagles is found in the project area, but individuals are only present during the winter months.  Yes Northern Goshawk Accipiter gentilis Sensitive, MIS & Migratory Bird Species Yes Spruce, mixed conifer and aspen dominated stands containing variable sized mid-aged to mature trees that are near a permanent water source are found in the project area. Yes Pygmy Rabbit Brachylagus idahoensis  S  No  Tall, dense sagebrush habitat below 8,500 feet elevation is not present within the project area.  No Greater Sage Grouse Centrocercus urophasianus S Yes Suitable Sage grouse habitat is found in the analysis area. Sagebrush is not a targeted vegetation species for treatment in this project. Yes Townsend’s Big-eared Bat Corynorhinus townsendii S Yes Streams, springs, bogs, and lake foraging habitat is found in the project area. Yes Spotted Bat Euderma maculatum S Yes Sagebrush, wetlands, and forested foraging habitat are found in the project area. Yes      Peregrine Falcon Falco peregrinus anatum Sensitive & Migratory Bird Species No The project area doesn’t contain the steep cliffs and rocky ledges needed for nesting or the open country for foraging. No Three-toed woodpecker Picoides tridactylus S Yes Forested areas used by Three-toed woodpecker are mainly mature spruce forested areas. Spruce forested areas occur in the project area. Yes Flammulated Owl Otus flammeolus S Yes Forested acres used by Flammulated owls on Monroe Mt. are Douglas fir/spruce mix. The project area contains a scattered Douglas fir component. Yes  As shown in Table 1 above, the following species are dismissed for further analyzed in this project for reasons pertaining to their known existence (present or historical) or lack of suitable habitat within the project area: 1. Bighorn Sheep (Ovis Canadensis): Contiguous acres of cliff face habitat lacking. 2. Pygmy Rabbit (Brachylagus idahoensis): Tall, dense sagebrush habitat below 8,500 feet elevation is not present within the project area. 3. Peregrine Falcon (Falco peregrinus anatum ): The project area doesn’t contain the steep cliffs and rocky ledges needed for nesting or the open country for foraging.   IX. Analysis Process  As a part of this analysis, an assessment of possible impacts to the species mentioned above in Table 1 was conducted. The project area was assessed for possible impacts to these species known to occur on the Fishlake National Forest. Table 1 lists the wildlife species known to occur on the Fishlake National Forest that are identified as R4 Sensitive species. Table 1 also identifies habitat suitability within the project boundaries for this project. The techniques and methodologies used in this analysis are considered the best available science because the analysis includes a summary of the credible scientific evidence combined with local professional knowledge which is relevant to evaluating reasonably foreseeable adverse impacts. The best available science is a composite of several key elements. The elements of science used are: • On-site data and history. District records and the corporate GIS database were reviewed for sightings and potentially suitable habitat for each species. Information analyzed using GIS include:  • Forest vegetation • Topography • Historical management activities, including treatments • Fences and other range improvements • Roads and trails • Streams and other water bodies  • Scientific literature. Literature reviewed and cited is listed in the appendix and included within the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2006). Relevant literature includes information reviewed for basic understanding and for current science literature.  • Recovery and/or conservation plans • USFWS publications • UDWR studies, publications & range maps • Life history for sensitive species on the Richfield Ranger District (Rodriguez 2006) • Breeding Bird Surveys and FNF Breeding Bird Surveys 1995-2010 • Internet Sources (Nature Serve)  • Goshawk— a variety of methods have been used to search for and locate Northern Goshawk territories on the Richfield Ranger District. Methods have included Region 4 protocol goshawk surveys for proposed projects, aerial helicopter surveys in suitable habitat (winter months), monitoring existing territories annually, and reporting of nests randomly located by public or survey contractors for other projects. Known nest and alternate nests have been GPS recorded and GIS mapped. Territorial boundaries were established by the District Wildlife Biologist working with the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) shop. Boundaries are drawn according to aerial photo maps using best judgment of forested areas around the nest areas that may be used by goshawk adults and their young. These boundaries are in no way absolute but are a good representation of suitable territorial habitat. As alternate nests and new territories are found the GIS data base and District wildlife data base records are updated at the end of each field season.  • Neo-tropical migratory birds—Data gathering for avian species were accomplished through walking and driving transect. Established routes have been surveyed on a regular basis since the Burnt Flat Analysis Project (BFAP) was proposed in 1993 (Monroe Mountain). Random point bird counts were established as well for the BFAP. Bird data are also collected along general wildlife survey routes as well as during protocol goshawk survey routes. Avian data were gathered by well experienced birders working for the Richfield Ranger District (RRD).  • Flammulated Owl—Data gathered for Flammulated owl was established throughout the project area on designated routes in suitable habitat. Night surveys during the early summer months using protocol calling methods helped establish a presence of owls and a preferred habitat type on Monroe Mountain. Data points of call responses were GPS recorded and entered into GIS for future analysis. Areas of preferred habitat have been noted and a GIS data base is being established to reference preferred habitat by Flammulated owls.  • Three-toed Woodpecker-- Bird data were collected along general wildlife survey routes as well as during protocol goshawk routes in proposed treatment units. This species was identified and documented as well as its preferred habitat type (Hill 2002). Through years of survey work in the spruce zone on Monroe Mountain we have seen an increase of Three-toed woodpecker use during a spruce bark beetle outbreak. Three-toed woodpeckers continue to remain in the beetle ravaged areas.  • Bats—Bat data were collected with an electronic “Anabat” device. Data was recorded in the proposed project area. Data was retrieved and analyzed at the end of the 2014 field season.  • Scientific literature. Literature reviewed and cited is listed in the Literature Citations section and included within the Life History paper (Rodriguez 2008).  • Professional knowledge, judgment and experience. The primary specialist that conducted this analysis was Kreig Rasmussen, Richfield Ranger District Wildlife Biologist (23 years). Expert birder, Richard Wilkinson has worked summers for approximately 20 years to survey and record bird species around the Richfield Ranger District. Other wildlife technicians have worked several consecutive years on the Richfield Ranger District (RRD) and helped enhance the collective database. The collective professional knowledge of the project area, judgment of how to integrate science with local conditions and the experience gained from implementation of other projects have been incorporated into the analysis.  • Project specific wildlife surveys were conducted during summer 2012, 2013, and 2014 with other surveys being conducted within the project area in previous years. These surveys have also targeted some of the species listed above and their habitat. Monroe Mountain, including the project area, has been surveyed in select areas multiple times over the past 15-20 years to develop a baseline and trend data set. Specific surveys include: 1. MIS Surveys 2. Project level bird surveys  XI. Effects Analysis and Determinations (see Wildlife Specialist Report for detailed analysis) 1. Bald Eagle ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus)  Direct and Indirect Effects: Bald eagles have been known to occur on the Fishlake National Forest during the late fall, early spring and winter months. During this time Bald eagles tend to concentrate wherever food is available, often around open water where fish and waterfowl can be caught. After the open water freezes, Bald eagles become more opportunistic and eat whatever is available. At this point Bald eagles generally move down to the foothills and valleys to feed on small mammals and carrion (Rodriguez 2008).  Utah hosts one of the largest state populations of wintering bald eagles. More than 1,200 bald eagles have been counted in Utah during recent years. About 3,000 to 4,000 of the 13,000 bald eagles that winter in the lower 48 states occur west of the Rocky Mountains. Twenty-five to thirty percent of these western eagles spend the winter in Utah, indicating the significance of Utah's winter habitat (UDWR 2009). In 2009 the USFWS published a Post De-listing monitoring plan in the lower contiguous 48 states (USFWS 2009). The main threat to Bald eagles is habitat loss and disturbance from development of shoreline areas, recreation, logging, road building, and mining (Spahr et al. 1991). The proposed project would create some positive effects for this species and increase habitat effectiveness by creating more snags in the burned ares for perching, attracting more prey species to a newly treated area, and hunter opportunites would increase thus having the potential to have gut piles and unretrieved carcasses available for foraging. The decision consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Since Bald eagles are seasonal visitors to Monroe Mountain it is expected that most mechanical and prescribed burn activities would be completed by early November when the first Bald eagle migrate to the mountain. While implementation actions would not likely impact the Bald eagle the effects of the treatments would impact the bird and its habitat. It is common for Bald eagles to prey on the carcasses of un-recovered big game animals from hunting season or the parts of a harvested big game animal left from field dressing. Also included in this are fish that have either died or parts of fish that have been left behind after cleaning. They are also found utilizing the carcasses of dead livestock animals that have expired for unknown reasons on the summer range. As treatments would be conducted and big game animals attracted to them, a higher number of hunters would hunt treated areas to take advantage of higher concentrations of big game species. As a result, the potential for habitat enhancement by increasing foraging habitat for some potential prey species is high. However, as stated previously, Bald eagles are only late fall, winter and perhaps early spring inhabitants and impacts to the bird and its habitat are expected to be minimal. As a result, treatments to enhance the Bald eagle occupancy are not crucial to manage for a sustainable population of eagles on the Forest. Based on this analysis, implementation of the decision would impact perching and roosting habitat in varying degrees but would not impacts the species adversely by modifying any one of the primarily habitat components necessary for persistence of the species on the Fishlake National Forest. As more acres are treated more opportunities for carrion and prey are made available to Bald eagles. See the Wildlife Specialist Report for additional information. Cumulative Effects: Effects to the Bald Eagle over time and from the previous actions on Monroe Mountain will be minimal. Bald eagles are known to use the mountain and the proposed project area seasonally. They arrive in early November and persist in the area until late March. They depend on carrion (dead animal carcasses) for food, but also kill their own prey. As winter snows increase in depth at the higher elevations eagles generally migrate to lower altitudes where carrion and prey are present. Past, present and future habitat improvement projects would help provide opportunites in the form of prey. Prey in the form of an increase of dead animals in the treatment areas. This increase would come from a higher number of wildlife and domestic animals being attracted to the site due to improved vegetative conditions. Animals may inadvertenly die there or be wounded from a hunter, not located and retrieved. In section 5 of the Wildlife Specialist Report is a description of the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project “May Impact Individuals or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species”. 2. Northern Goshawk (Accipiter gentilis)  Direct and Indirect Effects: Prescribed fire, wildfire, and mechanical thinning activities that occur within Northern goshawk territories may create habitat disturbances that would likely cause abandonment if not carefully mitigated by following the habitat recommendations identified in the Fishlake Forest Plan and other sources of best available science such as Graham et al. 1999. Implementation of these best science practices are part of the actions identified for this project. If activities occur within nest areas (NA) and post fledgling family areas (PFAs), territory abandonment would likely occur if Forest Plan requirements were not followed. The displacement of adult and juvenile birds, if present, would likely result in mortality and impact the viability of this species. The District developed alternatives and project design criteria that would minimize the chance of Northern goshawks being displaced because of project activities. Some project activities may remove or degrade potential foraging habitat in the short-term (5-15 years); however, the quality and quantity of potential foraging habitat would likely increase in select areas as aspen recovers following project implementation. To understand how the decision may impact the goshawk and its prey more or less it is important to discuss some of the key habitat requirements and guidelines that have been established by researchers. Important to the architectural structure of a goshawk territory (including both the NA and PFA) is the combination of an older class of forest type vegetation (mixed conifer-aspen) including tall mature trees with interlocking crowns, large trees, large down woody debris, snags (mix of structural snags), water, understory vegetation, and openings. All these structural components are crucial to the existence and persistence of goshawk. Security habitat from predators (as the Great-horned owl known to prey on goshawk chicks and adults on the Fishlake N.F.) comes in the form of a balance of the above mentioned components maintained in an undisturbed fashion to protect goshawk young and adults. Nesting habitat structure with open conditions allows for the predation of goshawks, and especially their nestlings, by great horned owls (Bubo virginianus) (Boal and Mannan 1994; Moore and Henny 1983; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994). Nestling mortality may increase during periods of low food availability (Moore and Henny 1983; Rohner and Doyle 1992; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994; Zachel 1985). Another crucial aspect of managing for the goshawk is management of vegetation for the bird and its prey. Reynolds et al. 1992 and Graham et al. 1999 both discuss the importance of managing a balance of habitat for the goshawk and its prey. Goshawks prefer to forage in closed canopy forests with moderate tree densities as compared to young open forests (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Goshawks take prey from small openings, although they usually hunt these areas from perches near the edge (Younk and Bechard 1994b). Medium to large-sized birds (woodpeckers, robins, grouse, or jays) and mammals (ground and tree squirrels and hares) tend to dominate breeding season diets (Squires and Reynolds 1997). In general, goshawks nest in mature to old forests with relatively large trees, high canopy closure (relative to surrounding areas), sparse ground cover and open understories. Nests are often located near the bottom of moderately steep slopes, close to water, and often adjacent to a canopy break (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Important internal components of forests in Utah include snags, multiple canopies, and down woody debris (Reynolds, et. al. 1994). The underlying concern with a project of this scale is how treatments in goshawk territories would impact their continued use and return back to the territory post treatment. The Richfield Ranger District, and especially Monroe Mountain, has the largest concentration of goshawk territories known on the Fishlake National Forest. Of the goshawk territories currently known on the District, 22 are on Monroe Mountain, and 18 are within the direct/indirect effects area for this proposed project. As nests are monitored on the District some are documented to have blown out of the tree and a nest no longer exists. A search is done for a replacement alternative nest and if found it is documented. In a previous action on the Richfield Ranger District, in the Oldroyd-Monroe Meadows area on Monroe Mountain, a treatment within the Post Fledgling Area (PFA) occurred. Implementation of the Forest Plan for Goshawk Management was implemented. These treatments were carefully evaluated prior to managing the area for hazardous fuels and it was determined that the risk of wildfire coming off the Fishlake National Forest to private lands was a substantial threat. Due to this threat an experimental treatment was developed to try and reduce fuels and manage for the bird. Treatments were implemented to reduce fuels near private land and a cabin. Although Forest Plan Guidelines were implemented, abandonment occurred and the pair has not been back to the area for the past two years. Being able to determine the exact cause and effect is difficult; however, it is the judgment of the Forest and district biologists that it was a direct result of the vegetation treatments and not applying our best knowledge to about the needs of the bird. Managing for bird persistence in the same area as summer cabins and private lands is difficult. As a result, thinning and burning treatments for this project in the Monroe area is a crucial component to the viability of the Northern goshawk population on the Fishlake National Forest. It is strongly recommended to not allow any treatments in NAs on Monroe Mountain. A thinning in a PFA may be designed to help prevent the spread of wildfire to private property while maintaining the integrity of the territory (Forest Plan, Northern Goshawk Amendment, Guideline Z). In Forest Plan direction for the Northern goshawk, forest vegetation structural stage classes are discussed and how they relate to preference by goshawk for nesting, post fledgling family areas, or rearing and teaching of young and foraging. Vegetation structural stage’s (VSS) range from 1-6 (with 1 being smallest and 6 being largest). The VSS classes found on Monroe Mountain average in the “3” range with more in the 2, 3, and 4 range and with fewer 5s and 6s on the top end. We find that VSS 5 and VSS 6 trees found on Monroe Mountain are low in numbers. With this VSS class in limited supply so is nesting habitat for the goshawk. Therefore, care must be taken to retain the largest trees on the landscape. The decision consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mature goshawks are known to hunt an area approximately 5,000 acres per territory foraging in a wide variety of forested habitat. There are approximately 10,461 acres of Post Fledgling Area goshawk habitat within the proposed project area. There are approximately 2,817 acres of Nest Replacement Area acres in the proposed project area. Habitat for goshawks would be affected by the decision due to the combined size of the foraging areas (5,000 acres for each territory). Goshawks are known to use a variety of habitats throughout their lifecycle. Removal of vegetation from a prescribed burn or mechanical thinning could have an indirect effect of decreasing foraging areas for an undetermined time period until it regrows back into suitable foraging habitat to support prey species. This could take 5-15 years or it could be greater than 100 years depending upon the location of the treatment and the species that inhabit the area. Goshawks are known to prey on a variety of mammals and birds such as; rabbits, squirrels, chipmunks, flickers, grouse, and jays. Burning would decrease habitat and populations of some prey species (especially small mammals) as woody debris is burned and increase populations of others (such as jays or woodpeckers) as snags are created. The larger mammals are more advantageous for them to forage upon as they provide more energy for the effort. As stated above, it is difficult to determine how long suitable vegetation will take to regrow and provide habitat for prey. This can further be complicated as the area is managed for other resources such as domestic and wild ungulates. Ungulates can slow or suppress suitable habitat for prey species, as well as weather events and storm patterns. Goshawks can breed successfully in forests where timber harvesting has occurred (Reynolds and others 1994; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994) but they appear to prefer stands of mature and overmature trees for nesting and foraging (Bright-Smith and Mannan 1994). Also, occupancy of the nest stand has been positively associated with patch size (Woodbridge and Detrich 1994). However, the effects of reducing the number and size of mature trees on existing goshawk densities or productivity are unknown. Population models for species in fragmented forest landscapes suggest that sharp declines in viability can occur if habitat decreases over the long-term (Franklin and Forman 1987; Lamberson and others 1992). The removal of suitable nesting habitat through timber harvesting or other management activities can be a threat to the goshawk (McCarthy 1989). Past treatments within PFAs have not only caused abandonment on the Fishlake but also on the Dixie National Forest to the South (Rodriguez 2014, personal conversation). Based on Fishlake data and observations from other goshawks biologists, not treating in the NAs for this project is important to the viability of the goshawk on Monroe Mountain and on the Fishlake National Forest. Treating within PFAs is generally not recommended in order to keep disturbance to a minimum. Surveys conducted in 2014 revealed two new goshawk nests with associated NAs and PFAs; however, only one of the territories occurs within the boundaries of this project. This new territory will be referred to as the “Indian Ranch Territory”. Approximately 310 acres of this territory occurs within the boundaries of this project. The nest was active in 2014 and successful in producing two fledglings. These 310 acres make up less than 1% of the project area. The majority of the 310 acres occur in stable aspen. To maintain habitat requirements and population viability, I recommended that no treatments occur in these 310 acres. These 310 acres could become part of the 40% nontreatment mosaic pattern that is required to remain to meet goshawk foraging guidelines. In summary, consistent with Alternative 2, the decision is no treatments will occur in NAs and PFAs. The decision allows for treatments within the foraging area that will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and opens areas up for foraging by the goshawk. The decision also allows for management of down woody debris, and snag retention, which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. No impacts to viability as a result of the decision are expected. The following measures will be implemented on the Monroe Mountain project to ensure proper management is occurring and viability considered and met; • “Monitoring requirements” (appendix CC) found within the goshawk amendment for the six forests in Utah discuss the following process: • ID m-1--Question: Are known goshawk territories on national forests remaining occupies? • Item to Measure: Goshawk territory occupancy at the forest level. • Acceptable Range: Less than 20% decline in territory occupancy over a 3 year period. • Measurement Frequency: Annually (report every 3 years) • ID m-2—Question: Are mitigation measures (standards and guidelines) employed during vegetative management project implementation sufficient to prevent territory abandonment? • Item to Measure: Goshawk territory occupancy following vegetative management treatments. • Acceptable Range: No territory abandonment on projects where mitigation measures are used. • Measurement Frequency: The first full breeding period following activity in all projects where pre-project surveys determined territory occupancy. (report annually) • ID m-3—Question: Is habitat connectivity as represented by structural and species diversity and dispersion thereof, within and among 5th and 6th order watersheds (or equivalent ecological scale) being maintained? • Item to Measure: Spatial dispersion patch size of mature and old forest groups within a 5th to 6th order watershed. Tree species composition mix within mature and old groups within a landscape. • Acceptable Range: Approximately 40% of the coniferous and 30% of the aspen forested acres within a landscape are in VSS 5 and 6 classes. Seral species characteristic of the cover type are well represented VSS 5 and 6 classes. • Measurement Frequency: Completion of each landscape assessment. (report every 5 years) • Other sections of the monitoring matrix speak of monitoring long-term for down woody material and snags.   Cumulative Effects: Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to goshawk in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing and private land development on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. All these types of disturbances can affect goshawk occupancy within their territory to some degree. As we move into the future for goshawk habitat management it is important to keep in mind Monroe Mountain currently provides prime habitat to foster the life cycle components needed to sustain a healthy population. The mountain has more goshawk territories per square mile than any other district on the Fishlake National Forest. A delicate balance is needed to provide current territorial features while planning for key habitat components in the future. In section 5 of the Wildlife Specialist Report is a description of the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle. Northern Goshawk Analysis Conclusion Maintaining adequate structural components within the NAs and PFAs of goshawk territories to ensure habitat effectiveness which encompasses the entire portion of their life cycle when they are on the forest is crucial to maintain viability. It is also important to follow recommendations in foraging habitat to manage for prey species habitat. These structural components referred to in the goshawk amendment will help maintain a prey base for the adults to utilize during mating and rearing season as well as for the fledglings when they are old enough to hunt for themselves within the territory. The decision allows enough habitat requirements to be maintained as no treatments will occur in PFAs and NAs. The decision does allow for treatments to occur in Northern goshawk foraging areas. To maintain goshawk habitat requirements in the foraging areas, the following will be implemented: • Clumps of trees with interlocking crowns will be maintained across 40 to 70 percent of the foraging areas. Groups are made up of multiple clumps of trees. Clumps of trees will have two to nine trees with interlocking crowns. • Within the aspen areas, a minimum of 200 snags per 100 acres: 8 inch DBH – 15 feet tall will be retained. Within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas, a minimum of 300 snags per 100 acres: 18 inch DBH – 30 feet tall will be retained. • Within the aspen areas, a minimum of 50 down logs per 10 acres, 6-inch diameter at 8 feet long, and 30 tons per 10 acres will be retained. Within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas, a minimum of 50 down logs per 10 acres, 12-inch diameter at 8 feet long, and 100 tons per 10 acres will be retained. • No temporary roads will be constructed in Northern goshawks PFAs or NRAs. • All temporary roads will be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. • No clear-cuts will be implemented. • Treated areas will be rested from livestock grazing for a least two growing seasons post implementation, and possibly three to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts. This will help vegetation grow and improve following implementation. • Where mechanical treatments are to occur, no mechanical treatments using feller bunchers or skidsteers will occur in the stable aspen stands (approximately 5,338 acres) that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. These areas will still be mechanically treated, but with hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. • No direct fire ignitions will occur in the stable aspen stands (approximately 6,431 acres) that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. • In the seral aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir areas where direct fire ignitions are to occur, prescribed fire will be implemented with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. Prescribed fire will occur when no more than 60% of the area will be expected to burn. • Within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning will occur when low to moderate fire severities will be expected. • In the seral aspen where mechanical thinning treatments are to occur, conifers will be removed while retaining as much of the aspen as possible. In the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas where mechanical thinning treatments are to occur, live trees will be thinned using uneven aged management to a basal area of 90 with single and group tree selection. Dead and/or dying trees will be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris. In spruce/fir and mixed conifer areas where LRMP stock levels are below plan guidance, replanting of spruce and/or mixed conifer will occur. • Aspen browse thresholds and response options are included to ensure new aspen regeneration successfully recruits and aspen ecosystems move towards desired conditions. • Several other design features listed in the Record of Decision (ROD) (i.e. design features related to riparian areas, HUCs, three-toed woodpeckers, Flammulated owls, etc.) will also indirectly help minimize impacts to Northern goshawks. By not allowing treatments to occur in the NAs, PFAs, and by maintaining habitat in the foraging areas, impacts to goshawks will be minimized thus maintaining a viable population of goshawks across the Forest.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project “May Impact Individuals or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species”. 3. Greater Sage Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) Direct and Indirect Effects: The Greater sage grouse is a sagebrush obligate species because sagebrush is essential to their survival and is used for food and cover throughout their entire life cycle. The proposed project analysis area does contain acres of sagebrush but they are not targeted for treatment. The proposed project is a “forest type” treatment. Traffic used in project implementation will transect through areas of suitable sagebrush habitat. A direct effect could occur if a grouse were hit by a vehicle in suitable habitat area as traffic traveled to and from the project areas during implementation. A remote population of sage-grouse does occur on the very south end of Monroe Mountain (approximately 5 miles south from where active treatments will occur). No active treatments are proposed on the south end of Monroe Mountain. Also, there are several known leks and populations that occur in areas adjacent to Monroe Mountain on BLM and private land. According to trend data, sage grouse numbers on Parker Mountain have been increasing since 1999 although numbers are fluctuating. In 2008, sage grouse numbers slightly dipped on leks for the Parker Mountain population; 930 males were observed on annually counted leks, which is slightly down from 936 in 2007 (UDWR, 2008). The UDWR expects sage grouse population numbers to increase because during the last 2 years they have discovered 9 new lek sites. Any lek sites that have birds on them for three consecutive years gets included in the trend data. Also in a study conducted on the Parker Mountain, BYU research students combined with the Parker Mountain Adaptive Resource Management (PARM) Local Working Group to compare treatment types in sage grouse habitat. There treatments consisted of a control plot, Lawson Aerator, Dixie Harrow and Spike chemical treatment. They concluded that sage grouse preferred treated to nontreated sites (Dahlgren 2006). A FS-UDWR cooperative study was also conducted on the Hell’s Hole sage grouse population at the south end of Monroe Mountain. Similar results to the Parker Mountain Study were documented (Kreitzer 2006). Sage grouse surveys of the project area were conducted in birding routes in 2012, 2013 and 2014. No sage grouse were found as a result of these recent surveys. A single sage grouse was documented by a District Wildlife Technician in the late 90s within an area on the eastern bench in the central part of the mountain; however, no further individuals or groups have been documented to date. Approximately 44,187 (39,287 of Mountain Big Sage and 4,900 Silver Sage) acres of sage are found within the Cumulative Effects Area for the project (Forest Boundary). Not all of these 44,187 acres of sagebrush are considered suitable habitat for Greater sage grouse. Not all sagebrush is considered suitable because various sage types occur, densities vary, aspect varies, patch size varies, sagebrush understories vary, and geography varies. Since this project is designed to treat forest types (aspen, mixed conifer, spruce/fir) and no intentional treatment efforts are designed in sagebrush, no habitat or suitable habitat would be altered. As vehicles traveled through suitable sagebrush habitat and if sage grouse populations expanded to the project area, an individual grouse may get struck by a vehicle. This would be a direct effect. We are not aware of any grouse being hit by vehicles on the south end of the mountain where we have sage grouse. Indirect effects may occur if sagebrush habitat adjacent to the proposed forest treatment areas improved in habitat effectiveness. This may be due to some ungulate grazing pressure being re-distributed to the newly treated areas allowing sagebrush areas improve. The decision consists of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire in the forested cover types. As noted in the discussion above this proposed treatment is designed for direct treatments in forested ecosystems, it is unlikely that many acres of sagebrush that contain sagenester habitat would be affected. Some direct minor impacts may occur to sagebrush as equipment is used to go along the edge of sagebrush meadows to transport equipment or personnel for treatment implementation. Indirectly, vehicles traveling through sage habitat to and from project areas may cause dust and an occasional direct impact with a vehicle. None of these impacts pose a threat to the integrity of the habitat or viability of the Greater sage grouse. Cumulative Effects: Past, present and future activities on Monroe Mountain in suitable sagebrush habitat for sage grouse are important to the Richfield Ranger District. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing, habitat treatments and private land development on Monroe Mountain. Through the years acres of sagebrush have been mechanically treated, prescribed burned or burned from natural ignited wildfires. Past mechanical treatments in sagebrush have been carefully designed in a mosaic pattern and treated with tools that would thin sagebrush to meet wildlife habitat objectives. Large scale forestry projects may not produce any cumulative effect on sage grouse. In section 5 of the Wildlife Specialist Report is a description of the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rationale behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also describes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.       Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project “May Impact Individuals or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species”. 4. Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) and Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum)  Direct and Indirect Effects: Population densities are poorly understood because these species are difficult to monitor (Rodriguez 2008). They are still only suspected to occur on the Richfield Ranger District at the present time. Surveys were conducted across the District at select locations in 1993 (Toone 1993). Surveys with an electronic bat detector were conducted in the project area during the 2014 field season. The electronic detector was deployed at two riparian areas within the project area. Final data collected was sent to Titley Scientific for species verification. A final report was created by Titley Scientific (Corben 2015) and submitted to the Richfield Ranger District. Seven species were confidently identified in the dataset. They are: Big Freetailed Bat (NYMA), Mexican Freetailed Bat (TABR), Hoary Bat (LACI), Big Brown Bat (EPFU), Silver-haired Bat (LANO), Long-eared Myotis (MYEV), Little Brown Bat (MYLU). There were five files from Site 2 which may have been from two further species. One of these might have been Pallid Bat (ANPA) and the other might have been Fringed Myotis (MYTH). At this point Townsend’s Big-eared bat and Spotted bats have not been documented in or around the project area according to surveys. Understanding literature about these bats gives us the opportunity to take a hard look at the life cycle and distribution of these species. The main threat to these bat species is human disturbance at roost or hibernacula sites, because they will abandon these sites if disturbed (Spahr et al. 1991). Direct effects would come in the form of a decrease of prey in the removal or burning of trees. Moths are in important part of their diet and forested areas provide foraging opportunities. Riparian areas interconnected within the treatment areas would realize improvement and prey would increase for bats. Indirectly as the forest succession advanced over time insect prey for bats would improve. The decision consists of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. To date, studies assessing the impact of fire regimes on Spotted bats are not available. As Spotted bats tend to forage over open meadows and woodlands, some combination of silvicultural practices with prescribed fire to create open areas and maintain herbaceous plant diversity (and, presumably therefore, promote insect prey base diversity) may benefit this species (Schmidt 2003). Insect occurrence and density depend on adequate quantity, quality, proportions, configurations, and distribution of wet meadows and insect-supporting terrestrial vegetation,such as grasses and sedges in meadows and forest openings (Luce 2007). No treatments will be conducted within open meadows of grasses or sagebrush. Minimal treatments will occur in riparian areas while no treatments would be conducted in bogs, or seeps where prey for bats may be disrupted.  The decision could have an effect on the habitat effectiveness of bats. Bats find moths and other important insect prey species in conifer forests. As treatments are implemented bats would have to move to other non-treated areas. This would compress the use with bats already existing in the nontreated areas. Therefore, there could be a direct and indirect impact on this species in the short-term. This could cause bats to move in location but is not likely to impact viability of the species. However, a long-term benefit would be realized after the forest successional stages became more advanced. Cumulative Effects: Past, present and future activities on Monroe Mountain that would affect bat habitat are minimal. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing, habitat treatments and private land development on Monroe Mountain. Maintaining a balance of forested ecosystems, sage-grass and riparian habitat have helped provide good bat habitat on Monroe Mountain. There are ample small cliffs and outcrops for hibernating. A large scale forestry project will reduce the amount of insect prey available in the short term. Long-term positive effects will be added as riparian systems improve. Healthy young forests will provide a variety and abundance of insects. In section 5 of the Wildlife Specialist Report is a description of the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rationale behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also describes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination that the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project “May Impact Individuals or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species”. 5. Three-toed Woodpecker (Picoides tridactylus) Direct and Indirect Effects: Three-toed woodpeckers are found on Monroe Mountain within the Engelmann spruce forest types. These are mainly found on the central and northern part of the mountain. We have noticed they follow the spruce bark beetle outbreaks on the mountain. Past mechanical forestry projects on Monroe Mountain in Engelmann spruce have implemented forest plan guidance by managing for snags in groups and clumps of snags for cavity dependent species including the Three-toed woodpecker. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain nest cavities, prey, and cover for the woodpecker. The decision consists of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Implementation of the decision will temporarily reduce Three-toed woodpecker habitat in the landscape. Because the landscape is not lacking snags, suitable habitat (snag habitat) will be present across the landscape over time. As with all landscapes dominated by dead trees, as these areas decay and turn into down woody debris, insect populations will be reduced and woodpecker populations will move and may decrease on the landscape. Implementation of the decision may slow down the rapid progression of tree decay and allow woodpecker populations to be managed over a larger period of time. To minimize impacts from prescribed fire, as described in the ROD, no direct fire ignitions would occur during the nesting season (usually between May 15th and August 1st) in areas where cavity nesting birds such as Three-toed woodpeckers are found. Delaying any ignition until the late summer will allow cavity nesting birds to have completed their nesting, incubation, fledgling and dispersal portion of their life cycle for the season. The adults and young would be able to flee from dangerous conditions that fire may impose on them. To minimize impacts from mechanical treatments on cavity nesting birds found in a spruce-fir dominated forest type, thinning activities would usually commence after July 15. This timing would allow time for cavity nesting birds to complete their nesting and rearing season. Mechanical treatments provide the opportunity to selectively leave snags in groups or clumps throughout the site to provide a continuance of habitat features that are useable during and after the treatment. These design features provide protection (delayed timing of treatments in the season) of the nesting-rearing season while providing habitat features (leaving snags and clumps of trees and 40% non-treated forested throughout the project) needed for future viable populations on Monroe Mountain. Cumulative Effects: Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to Three-toed woodpecker in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Past spruce beetle outbreaks have provided a flush in prey for all woodpecker species on the mountain, but especially the Three-toed. Populations of Three-toed woodpeckers thrive in beetle infested areas. As these areas are harvested or natural beetle life cycles complete populations of woodpeckers may vary over time. Future fire treatments will attract woodpeckers for a few years as they scavenge for bugs under the bark of burned trees. Populations on Monroe Mountain are expected to persist, be viable, and fluctuate with natural insect cycles and habitat treatment. In section 5 of the Wildlife Specialist Report is a description of the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.      Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project “May Impact Individuals or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species”. 6. Flammulated Owl (Otus flammeolus)  Direct and Indirect Effects: On the Richfield Ranger District Flammulated owls have been detected in Douglas fir stands that contain some mature spruce and a light mix of aspen. The proposed project area contains acres of spruce, sub-alpine fir, aspen and Douglas fir. Flammulated owl surveys to regional protocol were conducted in the project area in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011 and 2014. Surveys for the 2014 field season were verified, analyzed and documented in the District database record and in GIS database at the end of the field season. At this time mapping occurred to delineate (with our best judgment and ground knowledge) Douglas fir habitat that may be suitable for Flammulated owls. Based on these surveys, we have determined there are approximately 1,550 acres of Douglas fir dominated forest type on Monroe Mountain. Not all of these acres are found within areas proposed for treatments. To help minimize impacts to Flammulated owls, as described in the ROD, no fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15 and after August 1) would be allowed. Very light “low severity” treatments of prescribed burning are possible to accomplish an understory type treatment while leaving over-story components intact (understanding that fire can have unpredictable actions we will be cautious to burn under uncertain conditions). Flammulated owls were detected each of the five years and were specific to Douglas fir habitat. Douglas fir habitat occurs within the project area mainly on the rims, and sharp ridgelines. The Douglas fir component of the spruce-fir mapped acres does not consist of a large quantity. It occurs in smaller acres and is patchy across the landscape. Moths and small mammals are the primary prey for owls. Moths are directly associated with trees. Owl surveys were conducted along major roads and trails as well as on foot through suitable habitat. Direct effects would occur as some birds may be struck by a falling tree during implementation or some may be burned during fire implementation. Indirect effects would occur in the form of habitat being removed through thinning or burning. Trees removed or burned may contain cover for the Flammulated owl. The decision consists of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. We estimate approximately 1,550 acres of Douglas fir are represented in the spruce-fir mix. Douglas fir habitat occurs within the project area mainly on the rims, and sharp ridgelines. The Douglas fir component of the spruce-fir mapped acres does not consist of a large quantity. It occurs in smaller acres and is patchy across the landscape. With the thinning treatments, the retention of large snags would occur where they are lacking in order to meet Forest Plan guidelines. Where available, stands would continue to maintain the number of snags required by the Forest Plan to support Flammulated owl nesting. As conifer treatments occur around Douglas fir habitat, Flammulated owls would persist in the area and benefit from the insects associated with post-fire treatments. Treatment areas are designed to leave nesting habitat with an associated foraging area. No fire ignitions, that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in the Douglas fir dominated areas, would occur as to preserve Flammulated owl habitat and populations on the mountain. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15th and after August 1st) would be allowed (refer to “low”, “medium” and “high” fire severity definitions in the FEIS). By avoiding the Doug fir dominated stands with moderate and high fire severities, habitat effectiveness will be maintained and viable populations of owls will be retained on Monroe Mountain. From past fire experiences on Monroe Mountain it has been evident that it is hard to withhold fire from spreading into Doug fir stands. This is mainly due to Doug fir stands being surrounded by and intermingled with sub-alpine fir. This condition has caused fire in the past to transfer into Doug fir stands and affect owl habitat in some cases. The use of mechanical thinning treatments and/or control lines, as described in the ROD, and the use of low severity fire would help minimize impacts from prescribed fire. The use of mechanical thinning treatments and/or control lines and low severity fire would help maintain the existing Douglas fir stands and components needed for Flammulated owls to persist on the mountain. Cumulative Effects: Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to Flammulated owls in different ways. We have seen an increase of A.T.V. traffic, camping, hunting, sight-seeing and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Past timber projects have only affected small patches of Douglas fir habitat. Areas within the Dairies that were burned during the Box Creek Fire and areas burned during the Twin Peaks prescribed fire also only affected small patches of Douglas fir habitat. Habitat effectiveness for Douglas fir stands can be lost if subjected to high severity fire. Past and present conditions have left habitat effectiveness for owls in good condition. Future activities could play a role in how much habitat is disturbed or removed in the Douglas fir type. This would have an effect on the amount and quality of habitat that would remain for Flammulated owl. In section 5 of the Wildlife Specialist Report is a description of the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rationale behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also describes past, present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Determination As a result of this assessment it is my determination the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project “May Impact Individuals or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species”.    IX. Summary of Determinations  As a result of this evaluation, it is my professional determination that implementation of the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project will have “No Impact” to the Bighorn sheep, Pygmy rabbit, and Peregrine falcon. As a result of this evaluation, it is my professional determination that implementation of the decision for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project will have a “May Impact Individuals Or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss of Viability To The Population Or Species” for the Bald eagle, Northern goshawk, Greater Sage grouse, Spotted bat, Townsend’s Big-eared bat, Three-toed woodpecker, and Flammulated owl.  X. LITERATURE CITED (Literature used in detailed analysis of Sensitive Species in the Wildlife Specialist Report for this project)   Boal, C. W.; Mannan, R. W. 1994. Northern goshawk diets in ponderosa pine forests on the Kaibab Plateau. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological   Bright-Smith, D. J.; Mannan, R. W. 1994. Habitat use by breeding male northern goshawks in Northern Arizona. Studies in Avian Biology 16: 58-65. Brown, James K. 1975.   Bull, E.L.; Jackson, J.E. 1995. Pileated woodpecker (Dryocopus pileatus). No. 148. In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. The Birds of North America. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC: The American Ornithologists’ Union.   Bull, E.L.; Parks, C.G.; Torgerson, T.R. 1997. Trees and logs important to wildlife in the interior Columbia River basin. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNWGTR-391. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 55 p.   Corben, Chris. 2015. Acoustic Monitoring, Richfield Ranger District – Monroe Mountain USDA Forest Service, July 14 - July 31, 2014, Analysis Conducted and Report Written By Chris Corben, Titley Scientific – BatSense, 601 Business Loop 70W, suite 105, Columbia, MO 65203 January 30, 2015  Covert-Bratland, K.A.; Block, W.M.; Theimer, T.2006. Hairy woodpecker winter ecology in ponderosa pine forests representing different ages since wildfire. Journal of Wildlife Management.70: 1379–1392.   Dahlgren, D.K., R. Chi, T.A. Messmer. 2006. Greater Sage-grouse Response to Sagebrush  Management in Utah. Wildlife Society Bulletin 34(4):975-985.  Fishlake National Forest (N.F.), Land and Resource(s) Management Plan (LRMP):  Environmental Impact Statement. 1986.  Graham, Russell T.; Rodriguez, Ronald L.; Paulin, Kathleen M.; Player, Rodney L; Heap, Arlene P.; Williams, Richard. 1999. The northern goshawk in Utah: habitat assessment and management recommendations. Kreitzer, C., Proctor, J. 2006. Monroe Mountain-Hell’s Hole Sage Grouse Study-Final Report.  Luce, R.J. and D. Keinath. (2007, October 31). Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum): a technical conservation assessment. [Online]. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. Available: http://www.fs.fed.us/r2/projects/scp/assessments/spottedbat.pdf [date of access-July 29, 2014]  McCarthy, C.; Carrier, W. D.; Laudenslayer, W. F. Jr. 1989. Coordinating timber management activities with raptor nesting habitat requirements. In: Pendleton, B. G., comp. Proceedings of western raptor management symposium. 229-235.  Moore, K. R.; Henny, C. J. 1983. Nest site characteristics of three coexisting Accipiter hawks in northeastern Oregon. Raptor Research. 17(3):65-76. Society; 1993 April 14-15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian Biology. Cooper Ornithological Society: 16: 97-102.  Rasmussen, Kreig M. 2013 Biological Assessment, Monroe Mountain Livestock Management Improvement Project.  Rasmussen, Kreig M. 2013 Wildlife Specialist Report, Monroe Mountain Livestock Management Improvement Project.  Reynolds, R. T. 1983. Management of western coniferous forest habitat for nesting Accipiter hawks. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-GTR- 102. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 7 p.  Reynolds, R. T.; Joy, S. M.; Leslie, D. G. 1994. Nest productivity, fidelity, and spacing of northern goshawks in Arizona. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14-15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian Biology. Cooper Ornithological Society; 16: 50-57.  Rodriguez, R.L. 2008. Life history and analysis of endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive and MIS species on the Fishlake National Forest. Version 4.1. Revised July 2006. Cedar City, UT. 152   Rodriguez, R.L. 2014. Personal communication regarding goshawk territories on Monroe Mountain.  Rohner, C.; Doyle, F. I. 1992. Food-stressed great horned owl kills adult goshawk: exceptional observation or community process? Journal of Raptor Research. 26:261-263.  Spahr, R., L. Armstrong, D. Atwood, and M. Rath. 1991. Threatened, endangered, and sensitive  species of the Intermountain Region. [American bald eagle, Spotted Bat, Townsend’s big-eared bat, Three-toed woodpecker, and Flammulated owl] Ogden, UT.  Squires, J. R.; Reynolds R.T. 1997. Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. Birds of North America, No. 298. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC.: The American Ornithologists' Union. 32 p.    Toone, R.A. 1993. General Inventory for Spotted Bats (Euderma maculatum) on the Wasatch Plateau, Manti-LaSal National Forest and the Old Woman Plateau and Thousand Lakes Mtn. Fishlake National Forest. Pages 4, 5 and 27.  UDWR. 2006. Utah Conservation Data. [Flammulated Owl]. Available: http://www.utahcdc.usu.edu/  UDWR. 2008. Annual Report Parker Mountain Adaptive Resource Management Group (PARM). http://utahcbcp.org/files/uploads/parm/2008PARMDWRAnnualReport.pdf  USDA Forest Service. 1990. Forest Service Manual 2600 Wildlife, Fish, and Sensitive Plant Habitat Management WO Amendment 2600-90-1. Washington D.C.  USDA Forest Service. 2000. Decision Notice Finding of No Significant Impact and Non-Significant Amendment of the Forest Plans in Utah for the Utah Northern Goshawk Project  USFWS. 2007. Federal Register. Removing the Bald Eagle in Lower 48 States from the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife. V. 72. pp. 37346  USFWS. 2007. Post Delisting Monitoring Plan (Bald Eagles). pp. 37 & 38  Woodbridge, B.; Detrich, P. J. 1994. Territory occupancy and habitat patch size of northern goshawks in the southern Cascades of California. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14- 15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian biology. Cooper Ornithological Society 16: 83-87.  Zachel, C. R. 1985. Food habits, hunting activity, and post-fledgling behavior of northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis) in interior Alaska. Fairbanks: University of Alaska. 81 p. Thesis.  XI. CONTRIBUTORS  • Richard Wilkinson, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Shane Greenwood, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Rhett Peterson, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Kyler Nielsen, District Wildlife Technician, Richfield Ranger District • Kreig Rasmussen, District Wildlife Biologist, Richfield Ranger District • Ron Rodriguez, Forest Biologist, Dixie-Fishlake National Forests    Appendix R – Aquatics Biological Assessment and Evaluation   I. INTRODUCTION  This Biological Assessment and Biological Evaluation (BABE) analyzes the potential impacts of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project on the threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate or R-4 Forest Service sensitive [1995 USFS Region 4 Sensitive Species List updated in 1998, 2003 and 2013] (TES) aquatic species which occur or have habitat within the project area. The purpose of this report is to make a determination regarding the effects of the Selected Action on these TES aquatic species. This BABE addresses whether the decision will impact a species that may result in a loss of viability of the species, or cause a sensitive species to trend toward federal listing.  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain. The project lies on the Richfield Ranger District of the Fishlake National Forest, in Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah. Monroe Mountain is located approximately 6 to 40 miles south southeast of Richfield running in a north-south direction.  The project area contains a variety of habitat types and encompasses elevations between about 5,600 feet at the lower elevation foothill slope breaks along the Forest boundary to over 11,200 feet on some of the peaks. The majority of the project is sited on the relatively gentle slopes of the plateau top of Monroe Mountain, but some components are on steeper slopes of all aspects, especially on some of the west facing drainages in Monroe Creek south to Dry Creek. The project area encompasses a variety of habitat types including aspen, mixed conifer with remnant aspen, high elevation conifer stands, mountain sagebrush, mountain brush, pinyon-juniper, herbaceous forbs and grasses, and streams and lakes with associated riparian habitats. Riparian areas contain conifers, aspen, cottonwoods, willows, and birch along with a variety of lower shrubs, grasses, sedges, rushes, and forbs.  This report tiers heavily to the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project FEIS (hereafter called FEIS) for its background information and descriptions of existing conditions, desired conditions, purpose & need, and lists of design features.  This report also tiers heavily to the Aquatic Specialist Report for Sensitive and MIS Aquatic Species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project (Whelan 2015a; hereafter called Aquatic Specialist Report) and hereby incorporated by reference, for its descriptions of design features applicable to all action alternatives, monitoring requirements, aquatic field conditions, alternative analysis and synthesis, and determinations for the action alternatives. This report will focus on effects specific to the actual Record of Decision (ROD) for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate or R-4 Forest Service sensitive aquatic species, with consideration of any differences from alternatives as described in the FEIS.     II. PURPOSE AND NEED  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to restoring aspen to levels more representative of its long-term level across the landscape, increasing native species biodiversity – both flora and its associated fauna, decreasing fire risk both at the watershed level and reducing the risk of large multiwatershed catastrophic fire, and increased grazing forage.  Figure 1: Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project General Location   III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION  Alternatives are created to respond to issues associated with the initially proposed action. The Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) considers and describes five alternatives in detail. The alternatives are: . No Action (current management) – Alternative 1 . Action Alternatives – Alternatives 2-5  See the FEIS for additional information regarding Alternatives 2-5. See the Aquatic Specialist Report for additional description and broad analysis of the effects of these alternatives to aquatic species  IV. DECISION  As described in the Record of Decision (ROD) for the Monroe Mountain Ecosystems Restoration Project, the decision is to implement Alternative 5 with the following modifications: (1) no treatments will occur in Northern goshawk Post Fledgling Areas (PFAs) and Nest Areas (NAs), and (2) the 2.6 miles of temporary roads near Barney Lake will not be constructed. The following is a summary of what will occur:  • Approximately 14,828 acres will be mechanically treated. • Approximately 25,991 acres will be treated with prescribed fire. • Approximately 12.1 miles of temporary roads will be built and rehabbed after project completion. • Approximately 7.2 miles of temporary fence enclosing 633 acres will be built around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake to protect treatment areas. • Aspen browse thresholds and response options will be implemented to ensure aspen regeneration successfully recruits. • Several design features will be implemented to help minimize impacts to Northern goshawk, Flammulated owls, Bonneville cutthroat trout, migratory birds, boreal toads, etc. • Implementation will occur over a period of approximately 10 years.  Due to the removal of goshawk PFAs and NAs from the treatment area, the total treatment acres described in the ROD are less than what was analyzed in the Aquatics Specialist Report for alternatives 2-5.  V. CUMULATIVE EFFECTS AREA  The cumulative effects area (CEA) for the aquatic species that will be analyzed in this document includes the aquatic habitat contained in the sub-watersheds within the Monroe Mountain unit Forest Boundary that contains the project area. See Figure 2 for a map of the modified Hydrological Unit Code (HUC) 6th field watersheds [afterwards called HUC6] and smaller inclusive subwatersheds that are within this CEA.  Many of the HUC6s as nationally defined include large areas of face drainages (i.e. short slopes on the sides of mountains that don’t interact with the main tributary stream on the Forest but instead include a segment of the larger valley bottom stream channel and even areas across these major streams such as Otter Creek and the Sevier River; for example see the Thompson Creek – Sevier River HUC in Figure 2). In most cases streams become disconnected near the Forest boundary by irrigation diversions. These were often placed near the head of alluvial fans and losing reaches. Due to this disconnect, analysis of the complete HUC below the diversion is unwarranted. It also artificially diminishes the calculated effects from projects on the Forest. Using a pour point at the diversion ensures that the area that supports the aquatic populations and the areas of maximum effects are included in analysis, while extraneous areas that would artificially dilute effects are not.  Therefore, many of the HUC6 subwatersheds were modified to a pour point at the diversion structure, losing reach, or Forest boundary. The redefined HUC6s that support important aquatic resources – major lakes and streams with fish populations and/or boreal toads have been analyzed in more detail using GIS tools for the analysis section of the document. In addition, smaller HUC7 and HUC8 subwatersheds within these HUC6s were broken out where they contained important lakes that are high value for fisheries and boreal toads. To simplify GIS analysis, the GIS runs were done one time for all the polygon pieces. I.e. in upper Manning Creek the analysis included one polygon for most of the subwatershed, and two smaller ones that were split out with lakes. For an overview of the whole modified HUC6, the three polygons were combined into tables arithmetically.  Starting in the SW corner of the Monroe Mountain CEA and working clockwise, which is the order they are discussed in the Aquatic Specialist Report, the subwatersheds analyzed in detail are: Upper Dry Creek, Upper Manning Creek (with subwatersheds Barney Lake and Manning Reservoir), the subwatershed Hunts Lake in Dry Canyon (the main Dry Canyon does not support aquatic resources with the exception of some potential and relatively minor boreal toad use areas in the headwaters), Monroe Creek (with subwatershed Magleby Lake), Thompson Creek - only some GIS criteria were developed due to the HUC configuration (including subwatershed Annabella Reservoir), Water Creek - only some GIS criteria were developed due to the HUC configuration (including subwatershed Big Lake), Koosharem Creek, Greenwich Creek, and Box Creek (split into upper and lower subwatersheds).               Figure 2: Project Area HUC6 and HUC7 Map and Cumulative Effects Area (see text for additional description).      VI. THREATENED, ENDANGERED, AND CANDIDATE SPECIES  Current policy for Threatened and Endangered species as stated in the Forest Service Manual 2670.3 (WO Ammendment 2600-95-7; USDA Forest Service 1995) includes the following direction:  1. Place top priority on conservation and recovery of endangered, threatened, and proposed species and their habitats through relevant National Forest System, State and Private Forestry, and Research activities and programs. 2. Establish through the Forest planning process objectives for habitat management and/or recovery of populations, in cooperation with States, the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) (or National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)), and other Federal agencies. 3. Through the biological assessment process, review actions and programs authorized, funded, or carried out by the Forest Service to determine their potential for effect on threatened and endangered species and species proposed for listing. 4. Avoid all adverse impacts on threatened and endangered species and their habitats except when it is possible to compensate adverse effects totally through alternatives identified in a biological opinion rendered by the FWS; when an exemption has been granted under the act, or when the FWS biological opinion recognizes an incidental taking. Avoid adverse impacts on species proposed for listing during the conference period and while their Federal status is being determined. 5. Initiate consultation or conference with the FWS or NMFS, when the Forest Service determines that the proposed activities may have an adverse effect on threatened, endangered species; is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a proposed species; or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical or proposed critical habitat. 6. Identify and prescribe measures to prevent adverse modification or destruction of critical habitat or other habitats essential for the conservation of endangered, threatened, and proposed species. Protect individual organisms or populations from harm or harassment as appropriate.  Field surveys were completed within the project area to analyze habitat for aquatic species and their populations numerous times between 1999 and 2014. As a result of these visits and through consultation with state and federal agencies, it is known that there are currently no threatened, endangered, proposed or candidate aquatic species on the Fishlake National Forest. Since no threatened, endangered, proposed or candidate aquatic species are present on the Forest, and therefore none within the aquatic biota CEA described above, there will be no effect to any threatened, endangered, proposed or candidate aquatic species from this project. Therefore, there will be no further discussion for aquatic species in these categories.     VII. SENSITIVE SPECIES  Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2670 provides management direction for Threatened, Endangered, and Sensitive Plants and Animals (FSM 2670). Forest Service policies for designated sensitive species (FSM 2670.32) states:  1. Assist States in achieving their goals for conservation of endemic species. 2. As part of the National Environmental Policy Act process, review programs and activities, through a biological evaluation, to determine their potential effect on sensitive species. 3. Avoid or minimize impacts to species whose viability has been identified as a concern. 4. If impacts cannot be avoided, analyze the significance of potential adverse effects on the population or its habitat within the area of concern and on the species as a whole. (The line officer, with project approval authority, makes the decision to allow or disallow impacts, but the decision must not result in loss of species viability or create significant trends toward Federal listing.) 5. Establish management objectives in cooperation with the States when projects on National Forest System lands may have a significant effect on sensitive species population numbers or distributions. Establish objectives for Federal candidate species, in cooperation with the FWS or NMFS and the States.  The Forest Service follows a two-tier planning process. The first tier is the Fishlake Land and Resource Management Plan (Forest Plan); the second is the site-specific project planning level which is represented by the NEPA analysis. The Forest Plan was prepared in accordance with the National Forest Management Act (NFMA) of 1976, the regulations in 36 CFR 219, and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1979. The Fishlake Forst Plan was approved in June 1986.  A goal documented in the Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (USDA Forest Service 1986) is to “identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened, and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals”. In addition the Plan states, “Current habitat of threatened and endangered species will be maintained. No adverse effects from management activities will be allowed”. General Direction in this Plan states, “Maintain habitat for viable populations of existing vertebrate species… …Do not allow activities that would negatively impact endangered, threatened, or sensitive plant or animal species. Follow direction in recovery plans.”  The Aquatic Specialist Report has additional information regarding the management zones encompassed within the project area and Forest Plan Goals, Direction, and Standards and Guidelines that apply Forest-wide and within specific management zones (Whelan 2015a; p27- 29).  Suitable habitat is present in the project area for Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads. A summary of Forest aquatic sensitive species is included in Table 1, below.    Table 1: Suitability of Habitat for Intermountain Region Sensitive Aquatic Species found in the Monroe Mountain Project Area on the Fishlake National forest. Species Suitability of Habitat for Sensitive Aquatic Species  Status Suitable Habitat in Project Area Rationale/Comments Colorado River Cutthroat Trout Oncorhynchus clarki pleuriticus  S/MIS  N   Outside of native range. No Colorado River cutthroat trout exist in project area waters, and there is no plan to reintroduce this species. Waters outside of native range are not normally considered for recovery purposes. Bonneville Cutthroat Trout Oncorhynchus clarki utah  S/MIS Y   Within historic native range. A Bonneville cutthroat trout (BCT) core conservation population exists in project area waters in Manning Creek and its tributaries. Manning Meadow Reservoir is a critical southern region UDWR BCT broodstock. The Manning Creek drainage has the only BCT conservation lake habitat on the Forest. BCT are managed under a Conservation Agreement that the Forest Service R-4 is a member signatory of (Lentsch 2000 [rangewide] and BVCT State of Utah Conservation Team 2008 [for Utah]). Rodriguez (2006) has life history information and overall Forest trend information on Bonneville cutthroat trout. Southern Leatherside* Lepidomeda aliciae S N Not known from Monroe Mountain. Historically occurred in the Sevier River drainage. Some use may have historically occurred in the lower most stream reaches on Monroe Mountain below the project treatment areas but within the project CEA. There is no evidence that southern leathersides currently occur in any of these waters (Utah Div. Wild. Res. 2009). Since Forest streams are generally disconnected from downstream waters by diversions and dry sections there will be no effects that could carry to currently occupied habitat.     Boreal toad Anaxyrus boreas boreas S Y Boreal toads are widespread across Monroe Mountain at elevations above 8,000 feet. Monroe Mountain was considered a Utah stronghold, with relatively stable numbers but monitoring methods have not been rigorous enough to quantitatively determine trend. Chytrid fungus, which is associated with population declines in other portions of their range, has recently been detected in all areas of Monroe Mountain. Declines may now be starting to be evident in some areas of Monroe Mountain. Besides their Forest Service sensitive species status they are considered a state sensitive species in Utah and managed under a UDWR Conservation Plan that other agencies are not signatories to (Hogrefe et al. 2005).  Life history information regarding Bonneville cutthroat trout can be found in Life History and Analysis of Endangered Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez, 2006, hereby incorporated by reference). This document contains summarized population trend and monitoring information, which can also be found in Hadley et al. (2011a) and Hepworth et al. (2003). For general life history information on boreal toads this report tiers to Rodriguez (2012) and Hogrefe et al. (2005). The U-W-C Habitat recommendations also include some general toad information, although more geared towards northern Utah (Appendix E). Finally, Goates et al. (2007) and Goates (2006) provides life history information gleaned from the 2003-2004 radio tracking project established to validate design features developed for an earlier Monroe Mountain planning project. The Aquatic Specialist Report contains a general synopsis of boreal toad life history and habitat use on Monroe Mountain, along with specific information on habitat use, movements, and response to treatments in the analysis section.  Due to population declines throughout their range, boreal toads were petitioned for listing as a threatened species. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service determined that the Southern Rocky Mountain population did not warrant listing, but that the Eastern Clade (which occurs in Utah) did warrant a full status review. Higher priority species are currently ahead of boreal toads in the process, but the full status review must be completed by FWS by September 2017. It is important that boreal toad habitat and population levels in the project area not be adversely affected by project activities, as it could add pressure towards a listing decision.     VIII. AQUATIC FIELD REVIEW  As described in the Aquatic Specialist Report, based on office file review, field review, and discussion with hydrologists and Division of Wildlife Resources biologists, the sensitive aquatic resources and habitat areas of concern are the Bonneville cutthroat trout broodstock in Manning Meadow Reservoir, boreal toads and their habitat across the mountain, the Bonneville cutthroat trout population in Manning Creek and its tributaries, and the Bonneville cutthroat trout lake habitat and trophy/high quality fisheries in Barney Lake and Manning Meadow Reservoir.  Figure 3 shows the project area stream fisheries habitat including Bonneville cutthroat trout streams, and Figure 4 shows project area boreal toad key habitat.  Figure 3. Stream Fisheries Resources of Monroe Mountain.  Figure 4: Mapped key boreal toad habitat.     The Aquatic Specialist Report has an extensive description of field review sampling and survey results for the project area (Whelan 2015a; p42-62). This document tiers to that section.  IX. EFFECTS ANALYSIS  This BABE tiers heavily to the Aquatic Specialist Report, which had an introductory write-up on general effects of fire and vegetation management projects to aquatic resources, then considered 9 specific measures or areas of effects to aquatic resources (Whelan 2015a; p63-119). That report then quantified and ranked 7 of the 9 measures. The ranking was done overall for the entire project area and by subwatersheds within the aquatic CEA (see Appendix K-1). This report will focus on a few general effects comments with regard to sensitive aquatic species and effects specific to the selected action described in the ROD.  Direct and Indirect Effects  A. Direct Effects  Direct effects are impacts that directly result in the death or injury to a fish or toad. One example would be a water quality impact such as a major chemical spill. Another example would be heavy equipment directly adjacent to a creek that crushes and kills a toad. As described in Whelan (2015a), direct effects to BCT and boreal toads are considered generally unlikely to occur, with the exception of a low but real risk to boreal toads from vehicles or equipment. The required design features applicable to all action alternatives in the FEIS and listed in the ROD for the Selected Action of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project reduce these risks to very low levels.  B. Indirect Effects  Indirect effects are impacts that are not directly connected in space and time. One example would be the spread of an aquatic invasive species that changes the ecology of an aquatic habitat, indirectly reducing the habitat quality for a native species. The activities associated with this project are relatively low risk for aquatic invasive species (AIS) transfer provided the required design features are followed (see USFS 2014a and 2014b).  There are several potential effects to aquatic habitats and associated species that can result from prescribed fire and vegetation manipulation projects. These include increased solar radiation and water temperature, decreased supply of large woody debris, erosion of streambanks, altered streamflow patterns, accelerated erosion, and increased sediment input to aquatic habitats. These are covered in detail in Whelan (2015a). The design features for this project, along with best management practices (BMP) guidelines, Forest Service manual and handbook direction, and Forest Plan standards and guidelines, help minimize these indirect effects to aquatic habitats.  Appendix C provides maps that show overlap of the proposed treatments with aquatic species habitat including mapped boreal toad habitat. Keep in mind that only the maps for Alternative 5 would be applicable to the decision made in the ROD, with the major change that the temporary road shown on the map near Barney Lake in the Manning Creek watershed would not be built. There would also be minor changes in reductions of treatment areas around three of the goshawk territories, which would reduce the level of impacts from those already considered and disclosed.  Effects of the No Action Alternative  Under the No Action Alternative there would be no vegetative treatments and no direct adverse effects would be expected to Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads and their habitat.  Potential indirect effects would come from natural succession as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This change in vegetation communities could potentially affect fire risk, fire behavior, fire severity and recovery times, and watershed function.  A wildfire may have a negative effect on stream or lake water quality (depending when and where it burned), as it would likely occur in the summer months when control efforts are more difficult and the acreage burned may be greater than the area proposed for treatment under one of the action alternatives. This would result in potentially more sediment moving into the streams and/or lakes following a post-fire precipitation event than from a planned prescribed burn. These high rates of sediment could cover gravels and spawning habitat and may adversely affect localized populations resulting in long-term negative effects to aquatic species.  Indirect Effects of the Selected Action (Alternative 5 with Modifications)  General discussion – The Aquatic Specialist Report analyzed the impacts of all action alternatives, Alternatives 2-5, on aquatic species including Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads. A summary ranking based on 7 criteria found Alternative 2 to have the least impacts to aquatic species and their habitat overall, with Alternative 5 as having the second least level of impacts of the action alternatives. Alternative 3 had somewhat more impacts than Alternative 5, with Alternative 4 having the most impacts to aquatic biota (see Whelan 2015a; p107-108).  Since treated area was fairly consistent between action alternatives, mostly varying the type of treatments between them, the benefits of the action alternatives to reduce fire risk to aquatic species and their habitat was considered constant between the alternatives. Thus the analysis focused on the impacts or “costs” associated with obtaining these benefits for aspen, aquatics, and other resources.  The Aquatic Specialist Report made determinations for Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads for the base action alternatives, Alternatives 2-5. The determination was “MIIH” for all action alternatives for both species (Whelan 2015a; p125). This is not to say there would be no impacts; the ranking of alternatives in the paragraph above could be considered a relative ranking of the short to moderate-term impacts to these species. If the design features are implemented correctly and the required monitoring built into the project is carried out, these impacts will not impact long-term viability.  The Selected Action (Alternative 5 with modifications) removes some of the proposed acres that were in three goshawk territories from treatment, which drops the overall treatment area. It also removes a temporary road that had potentially high levels of impacts to both Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads (Whelan 2015a; Table 12 p94, Table G-3 p106). Thus the Selected Action will have fewer impacts than those already determined to have a “MIIH” determination. This supports a “MIIH” determination for the Selected Action, provided the project is properly administered and implemented.  Additional specific information for Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads is listed below. This information is also found in the Aquatic Specialist Report but for all action alternatives.  Bonneville cutthroat trout – The Selected Action (Alternative 5 with modifications) may impact individual Bonneville cutthroat trout due to indirect effects. Part of the project planning area is important habitat for Bonneville cutthroat trout (BCT):  • Manning Meadow Reservoir has been managed as a southern Utah Division of Wildlife (UDWR) BCT broodstock since 1992. This source of pure BCT has been instrumental in preventing BCT listing to date, has helped refound several new conservation populations on the Forest, is important for native cutthroat sport-fishing stocking (to eliminate the need to stock non-native cutthroat trout), and currently provides over 500,000 eggs annually to meet UDWR needs. • Manning Creek has been managed as a UDWR core conservation population since 1996. For many years it was one of the larger populations on the Forest, functions as a partial metapopulation, and provides high quality habitat for BCT. • The Manning Creek watershed contains the only BCT core conservation population lake habitat on the Forest. Manning Meadow Reservoir provides a high quality sport fishery after the lake is opened for fishing following broodstock operations. Barney Lake, where BCT co-occur with sterile hybrid tiger trout, also provides a high quality fishery. The following factors make short to moderate term impacts to BCT highly likely to occur from the selected alternative with modifications.  • A considerable portion of the Manning Creek drainage is planned for treatment under the modified Alternative 5. 1) Treatment is planned for 20% of the land area in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed excluding the upper reservoirs. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir 33% of the area is planned for treatment. Above Barney Lake 62% of the area is planned for treatment. When all areas are considered together, 21% of the land area in the Manning Creek combined HUC6 (see Figure 2) is planned for treatment [note: some of these treatment levels will be reduced slightly by the modification of removing goshawk territories from treatment] . i. These treatments at the 6th field HUC are at levels where population scale effects have been experienced by other fish populations based on effects of past fires in the UDWR Southern Region. ii. The Forest does not have experience at modeling at the 7th field HUC level, but communication with professional hydrologists indicate reasons for concern at high treatment percentages at the 7th field level. 2) Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling found ERAs for the action alternatives to be near, at, or above the suggested Threshold of Concern (10). Under Alternative 5 the ERA value was 10.5 in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed excluding the upper reservoirs. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir the ERA was 14.9. Above Barney Lake the calculated ERA was 22.3, but this included the road. When all upper Manning areas are considered together, the ERA was 10.9 [note: some of these ERA levels will be reduced slightly by the modification of removing goshawk territories from treatment, and removal of the road drops the Barney Lake ERA to 21.1]. i. These treatments at the 6th field HUC are at ERA levels where population scale effects have been experienced by other fish populations on the Forest based on observed fisheries effects and calculated ERA values by Haraden (2013) on the Twitchell Canyon fire. 1. Calculated ERAs for North Fork of North Creek and Indian Creek were 9 and 10.3 (Haraden 2013). These fish populations suffered population scale declines. 2. Calculated ERAs for Fish Creek and Shingle Creek were 14.4 and 15.5 (Haraden 2013). These fish populations were effectively lost. ii. The Forest does not have experience at predicting effects at the 7th field HUC level based on ERA calculations and monitoring for results, but the high levels calculated for Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake would seem to indicate need for extreme caution and multiple entries. Note, however, that these ERA levels are calculated assuming full implementation in one year which is unrealistic for these drainages as design features and fencing have been incorporated to ensure multiple entries over time in the Barney Lake and Manning Meadow Reservoir subwatersheds. Boreal Toad – The situation for the boreal toad is similar to the one above for Bonneville cutthroat trout (since they both occur in the Manning Creek drainage) with the following additional considerations project area wide:  • The entire upper elevation zone of Monroe Mountain can be considered crucial habitat for boreal toads. This mountain acts as a large conservation metapopulation for boreal toads. While monitoring to date has limited power to determine trends (K.Wheeler, UDWR native aquatics biologist, personal communication), professional opinion is that populations have been stable, at least until around 2012. Mountain-wide, over 11,000 acres has been mapped as important boreal toad habitat The following factors make impacts to boreal toad highly likely to occur from the selected alternative with modifications.  • Under Alternative 5 a considerable portion of the watersheds containing boreal toad habitat on Monroe Mountain are planned for treatment. 1) Treatment is planned for 21% of the land area in the upper Manning Creek combined modified HUC6 subwatershed. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir 33% of the area is planned for treatment. Above Barney Lake 62% of the area is planned for treatment. Above Hunts Lake 29% of the area is planned for treatment. Treatment is planned for 31% of the Monroe Creek subwatershed. Above Magleby Reservoir 26% of the area is planned for treatment. Above Annabella Reservoir 52% of the area is planned for treatment. Above Big Lake 36% of the area is planned for treatment and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. Treatment is planned for 10% of the Koosharem Creek subwatershed and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. Treatment is planned for 15% of the Greenwich Creek subwatershed. Treatment is planned for 14% of the Box Creek above reservoirs subwatershed and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments [note: some of these treatment levels will be reduced slightly by the modification of removing goshawk territories from treatment]. i. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad effects at the 6th field HUC but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at levels over 15% due to potential watershed effects to breeding sites and riparian use areas (i.e. flooding may cause sediment deposition on breeding sites and downcutting that dewaters riparian areas and makes them unsuitable for future toad use). ii. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad impacts vs. watershed area treated at the 7th field HUC level, but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at the high treatment percentages at the 7th field level in some boreal toad use HUCS. 2) Under Alternative 5 Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling found ERAs for many subwatersheds to be near, at, or above the suggested Threshold of Concern. In Dry Creek the calculated ERA was 11.6 (just below TOC 12). The ERA value was 10.5 in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed (TOC 10). Above Manning Meadow Reservoir the ERA was 14.9 (TOC 10). Above Barney Lake the ERA was 22.3 (TOC 10). Above Hunts Lake the ERA was 12.5 (just over the TOC of 12). The ERA value was 10.6 in the Monroe Creek subwatershed (TOC 11). Above Magleby Lake ERA was 8.8 (TOC 10). Above Annabella Reservoir the ERA was 12.9 (TOC 10). Above Big Lake the ERA was 15.5 (TOC 10) and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. The ERA value was 7.3 in the Koosharem Creek subwatershed (TOC 10) and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. The ERA value was 11.2 in the Greenwich Creek subwatershed (TOC 10). The ERA value was 14.1 in the Box Creek above reservoirs subwatershed (TOC 10) and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. i. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad effects at the 6th field HUC at various ERA levels but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at levels over suggested TOCs. ii. The Forest does not have experience at predicting boreal toad effects at the 7th field HUC level based on ERA calculations and monitoring results, but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at high treatment percentages at the 7th field level. Note, however, that these ERA levels are calculated assuming full implementation in one year which is unrealistic for these drainages as design features have been incorporated to limit treatment to 20% of a subwatershed at one time with multiple entries in the Barney Lake, Manning Meadow Reservoir, Annabella Reservoir and Big Lake subwatersheds.  • A considerable portion of the boreal toad mapped habitat (RHCAs) is planned for treatment. • In several subwatersheds, a considerable portion of mapped boreal toad habitat (RHCAs) already contains high existing road densities, and planned temporary roads will increase this density further. Note, however, that the one subwatershed where new roads had the greatest impact to boreal toad habitat, Barney Lake, has had the temporary road removed from the Selected Action. C. Cumulative Effects  Bonneville Cutthroat Trout  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, timber/thinning operations, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition and densities and riparian environments, which has reduced habitat for Bonneville cutthroat trout (BCT) in some cases and created habitat in others. In general, stream habitats have generally been reduced in quantity and quality, while large (vs. small beaver pond) lake quantity has increased. Also, across their historic range, BCT have generally been displaced by non-native trout species. BCT only occur on Monroe Mountain where they have been reintroduced into the Manning Creek drainage. Despite these cumulative effects and concerns, Manning Creek remains an important fisheries resource and BCT stream in the state of Utah, and is generally considered to be in good condition.  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the Selected Action to Bonneville cutthroat trout are expected to be of a short to mid-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with the Selected Action is not expected to cause long-term measurable adverse changes to Bonneville cutthroat trout. Any adverse effects to Bonneville cutthroat trout or their habitat from future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest through the use of project design features. The activities and effects listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase as a result of the selected action.  Boreal Toad  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, vegetation management, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition and densities and riparian environments, which has reduced habitat quality for boreal toads in some cases and created habitat or improved habitat quality in other cases. In general, stream habitats have generally been reduced in quantity and quality, and beaver density reduced from pre-European settlement conditions. Despite these cumulative effects and concerns, Monroe Mountain remains a very important area for boreal toad conservation in the state of Utah, although the true historic population size and distribution of boreal toads on Monroe Mountain is not known.  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the Selected Action to boreal toads are expected to be of a short to mid-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with the Selected Action, is not expected to cause long-term measurable changes to boreal toads. Any adverse effects to aquatic species or aquatic habitat for future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest through the use of project design features. The activities and effects listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase as a result of the selected action.  X. DETERMINATION AND RATIONALE  As a result of this evaluation it is my determination that implementation of the decision as described in the ROD for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project (Alternative 5 without the temporary road in the Barney Lake subwatershed and with no treatments in goshawk PFAs and NAs) may impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend towards Federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or species for Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads.  Table 16. Determination for the Record of Decision (ROD) regarding impact to the affected sensitive species. SPECIES DETERMINATION Bonneville cutthroat trout MIIH Boreal toad MIIH NI = No Impact MIIH = May Impact Individuals Or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend  Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species. WIFV = Will Impact Individuals Or Habitat With A Consequence That The Act ion Will Contribute  To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species. BI = Beneficial Impact   Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)- A determination of May Impact Individuals or Habitat is made for Bonneville cutthroat trout. See rationale below for documentation of factors considered when making this determination.  Boreat toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) - A determination of May Impact Individuals or Habitat is made for boreal toad. See rationale below for documentation of factors considered when making this determination.  Rationale:  Bonneville cutthroat trout - The following project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling and make it likely that while short to moderate term effects could occur, they would not likely be at a scale of a trend towards federal listing.  • Since BCT in Manning Creek overlap boreal toad habitat above 8,000 feet, they receive additional protection in this zone as there is a 100 foot stream buffer and 328 foot breeding site buffer with no harvest. There is also a zone from 100 feet to 328 foot from streams and 328 feet to 984 feet from breeding sites where no mechanized equipment can be used for harvest. 1) This buffer distance will filter out the vast majority of overland sediment flow [not channelized] before it can reach the creeks or lakes. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan (FP IV-33) that states: “Special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet”. • Treated areas would be rested from livestock grazing for 2 growing seasons (i.e. usually grazed late the 2nd year) and possibly 3 if needed. This reduces cumulative effects from livestock grazing. • AIS control measures are included as a design feature, which should effectively eliminate the risk of bringing in new AIS or spreading AIS currently on the mountain (see USDA Forest Service 2014a and 2014b). Drafting will include screens to prevent intake of fish or amphibians. • Standard measures are included for fueling and storing of fuel away from riparian areas, spill containment plans to prevent effects from spills, etc. • Upland areas would be treated first and separately from riparian areas. • No more than 15% of the upland area at the modified HUC6 area would be treated at one time. The area would then be allowed to recover [comparable to pre-treatment] watershed function, after which an additional 15% could be treated, or the remaining area if less than 15%. 1) Empirical data from past fires in southern Utah show that trout populations are likely to survive at this level with habitat suffering only minor short-term negative impacts. • No more than 5 to 10% of the riparian area within a modified HUC6 subwatershed would be treated at one time. The area would then be allowed to recover [comparable to pretreatment] riparian function, after which an additional 5-10% could be treated. • Post-treatment visual monitoring would be conducted to determine potential for increased sediment into streams. Localized treatments of straw mulch, wood chips, slash placement, seeding, and silt fencing could be installed as needed to control, prevent, or minimize effects from soil erosion. • Snags (200-300/100 acres) and downed logs (50/10 acres) would be left which will help provide large wood for habitat formation/diversity. • Ground based treatments would occur only on slopes less than 40%. • Equipment use within riparian areas would occur only when soils were dry, frozen, or covered with snow to prevent wheel or track damage. Low ground pressure equipment would be used when possible. • Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. • No skid trails or landings would be constructed in riparian areas. • No direct ignitions would occur in riparian areas on slopes greater than 40%. Prescribed burning would be ignited when low to moderate fire severities would be expected in riparian areas and spruce/fir or conifer stands with very low aspen component (<15 recruits/acre). Since BCT in Manning Creek overlap boreal toad habitat above 8,000 feet, in this zone above 8,000 feet there is a 100 foot no direct ignition zone along streams (fire could back in). 1) The 100 foot no ignition zone along streams will trap the majority of overland sediment [not channelized] flow from shallower slopes along treated/burned areas and capture a portion of the sediment from steeper slopes. This will reduce sediment delivery to the streams. The 100-foot no ignition zone will likely maintain stream shading and stream temperature at levels nearly the same as for the no action alternative. A 100-foot no ignition zone will also likely maintain large woody debris levels very close to the no action alternative. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan for vegetation treated by burning (FP IV-49) that apply to wildlife, which states: “Limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values”. 2) Nutrient loading effects from the burning will be reduced by passage of overland water flow and sediment through the riparian buffer (Belt et al. 1992 4:3). • For the seventh field HUCS (as delineated for the aquatics CEA): Manning Cr. – Manning Res., Manning Cr. – Barney Lake, Thompson Cr. - Anabella Res, and Water Cr. - Big Lake – vegetation treatments will be limited to 20 percent of the HUC area until watershed function is recovered [comparable] or will be limited to treatments that keep a current Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling of the HUC at or under the Threshold of Concern (TOC) of 10. • Prior to beginning implementation within a HUC6 watershed, the ERA modeling will be repeated for that HUC to incorporate the recovery period (i.e., years from the analysis done for this project to the implementation start date) for past projects, allow inclusion of new projects that were previously authorized but not yet carried out or completed during this planning process, and the proposed work. This will help incorporate effects from the currently authorized but not yet implemented or completed work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain/North Clover projects. If the new ERA modeling shows the planned work will push the HUC over the TOC, multiple entries will occur to reduce cumulative effects to the subwatershed. • The District will coordinate project treatments in watersheds containing Bonneville cutthroat trout or boreal toads with the UDWR southern region fisheries/toad personnel. Additional factors and considerations include:  • The Selected Action (Alternative 5 with modifications) does not include building the temporary road near Barney Lake that was predicted to have considerable impacts to Bonneville cutthroat trout habitat. • Fencing of Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Reservoir treatment areas will ensure good protection of aspen sprouts and likely increase the amount and rate of aspen recovery within the treated area, reducing sedimentation to the reservoirs. It also would allow for multiple entries which will spread the treatment effects over time. • Other boreal toad design features will provide additional protection of Bonneville cutthroat trout habitat. • The soils and hydrology report (Solt 2015) suggests very little additional risk of sediment delivery from areas burned at low intensity/severity. • The prescribed burning (with a mix of fire severities planned to primarily have low to moderate severities) would likely have less negative effects then a wildfire. • The treatments would reduce the risk of a large high severity wildfire in the drainages treated. • The fish populations at the stations within the project area sampled appeared relatively robust. The majority of Manning Creek and its tributaries had good streambank stability as determined by Pfankuch adjusted for stream channel type (Petty 2004, Appendix I). • Robust monitoring is built into the selected action, including stream fish populations, streamflow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates. Monitoring would also include lake water quality and hydrological channel characteristics at established stations. • There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on Bonneville cutthroat trout (see cumulative effects section). The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to Bonneville cutthroat trout, their population will be maintained in the aquatic CEA in the longterm.  Boreal toad – The following project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling/considerations and make it likely that while short to moderate term effects could occur to boreal toads, they would not likely be at a scale of a trend towards federal listing. For boreal toads, this includes all of the factors listed under Bonneville cutthroat trout along with the following additional factors:  • Project implementation would utilize boreal toad Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) of 328 feet from each side of streams or the high water line of ponds, lakes, and wetlands as buffers for vegetation treatments. Utilize RHCAs of 984 feet from known boreal toad breeding ponds (see Figure 4 for mapped RHCAs). • In order to protect Boreal toads and hibernacula1 from being crushed, no ground-based mechanized harvesting equipment would be permitted within the RHCAs. • Within the RHCAs, vegetation treatments would be limited to hand-thinning, horse, or helicopter thinning up to 100 feet from the stream or up to 328 feet from the known boreal toad breading ponds. • No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within 100 feet of perennial streams or within 328 feet of breeding ponds unless such treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist* (*for the purpose of improving boreal toad habitat or reducing fire risk to boreal toad habitat – See Whelan 2015a; p20 and Appendix M). 1) This will filter out the majority of overland sediment flow [not channelized] before they reach the creeks. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan (FP IV-33) that states: “Special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet”. • Within the RHCAs, no pile/slash burning would occur within 100 feet from the stream or breeding sites edge. Within the remainder of the RHCAs, pile or slash burning would occur during the Boreal toad dormant season (October 1 thru April 15) unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • Within the RHCAs, snags (200 per 100 acres in aspen, 300 per 100 acres in mixed conifer spruce/fir, and large downed logs (50 per 10 acres; a minimum of 15 tons per 1 An opening where Boreal toads can go underground. acre) would be retained as cover for toads. This is the same criteria as general project criteria for snags and downed logs. • Within the RHCAs, thinning treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would target less than or equal to 60 percent of the stands. • If any unmapped perennial streams or water sources in Boreal toad supporting habitat were encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 100-foot buffer. No treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • If any boreal toad hibernacula were encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 328-foot buffer. No treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • Temporary roads within the RHCAs would have toad passage friendly culverts installed where culverts are needed (buried culverts or bottomless arched structures) for the duration of the project. • Dipping or drafting water for fire activities from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show a change in water levels from the use would be avoided, except for emergencies. • Within the RHCAs, prescribed burning would occur when generally low to moderate fire intensity and severities would be expected. Prescribed fire personnel would attempt to implement prescribed burning during the Boreal toad dormant season (1 October thru April 15). • No direct fire ignitions would occur within 100 feet from the streams and 328 feet from Boreal toad breeding ponds unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. Fire ignitions could occur outside these buffers and allowed to back into these areas. 1) The 100 foot no ignition zone along streams will trap the majority of overland sediment [not channelized] flow from shallower slopes along treated/burned areas and capture a portion of the sediment from steeper slopes. This will reduce sediment delivery to the streams. The 100-foot no ignition zone will likely maintain stream shading and stream temperature at levels nearly the same as for the no action alternative. A 100-foot no ignition zone will also likely maintain large woody debris levels very close to the no action alternative. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan for vegetation treated by burning (FP IV- 49) that apply to wildlife, which states: “Limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values”. • Temporary roads within RHCAs will not be constructed or used for hauling logs between April 15 and October 1 of the calendar year, unless surveys and field inspections determine that toads are not likely to be impacted. Additional factors and considerations include:  • Robust monitoring is built into the selected action before, during, and after project implementation. Monitoring will be done to ensure project design features are implemented as designed, work as intended and are effective, and that site-specific findings of toad use areas, timing, etc. are incorporated into implementation actions. This monitoring will help ensure that boreal toad impacts are minimized. Monitoring will also include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations (see Appendix J in Whelan (2015a) - which is Appendix F in the FEIS - for a draft monitoring plan). The monitoring plan includes project objectives of determining changes in toad use areas, chytrid fungus infection rates/changes, finding key concentration areas such as breeding sites and hibernacula that will be buffered/protected, determining boreal toad use of areas planned for treatment, comparing toad use of treated versus untreated habitat, and (to the extent possible) determining population size and survival data. Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) control measures and annual reporting requirements are also included as part of the monitoring plan. • There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on boreal toads (see cumulative effects section). The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to boreal toads, their populations will be maintained in the aquatic CEA in the long-term.  XI. COMPLIANCE WITH MANAGEMENT DIRECTION  There will be no irreversible or irretrievable commitment of habitat associated with selection and implementation of the Selected Action (Alternative 5 without the temporary road in the Barney Lake subwatershed and no treatments in goshawk PFAs and NAs) that affects threatened, endangered, proposed or candidate aquatic species.  This process has served to review the effects of implementing the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project on aquatic sensitive species of the Fishlake National Forest. Adverse impacts that could affect the long-term viability of these aquatic sensitive species should be avoided provided the required design features listed in the ROD, FEIS, and Aquatic Specialist Report are implemented; thus the Selected Action (Alternative 5 with modifications) would meet Forest Plan Standards and Guidelines. See Appendix A for more information. Appendix A was based on Alternatives 2-5, but also applies to the Selected Action, since it has less impacts than Alternative 5. This is due to the reduced treatment area and the removal of the temporary road in the Barney Lake subwatershed, which was one of the major concerns for Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads under Alternative 5.            XII. REFERENCES  BVCT State of Utah Conservation Team. 2008. Conservation Agreement for Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) in the State of Utah. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Goates, M.C., K.A. Hatch, and D.L. Eggett. 2007. The need to ground truth 30.5m buffers: A case study of the boreal toad (Bufo boreas). Biological Conservation 138: 474-483.  Goates, M.C. 2006. The Dogma of the 30 Meter Riparian Buffer: The Case of the Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas boreas). M.S. Thesis. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 48pp.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, and J. E. Whelan. 2011a. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Middle Sevier River drainage, Utah, 2008-2010. Publication number 11-02. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 46pp.  Hepworth, D. K., M. J. Ottenbacher, C. B. Chamberlain, and J. E. Whelan. 2003. Abundance of Bonneville cutthroat trout in southern Utah, 2001-2002, compared to previous surveys. Publication number 03-18. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 66 pp.  Hogrefe, T.C., C.L. Bailey, P.D. Thompson, and B. Nadolski. 2005. Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas boreas) Conservation Plan in the State of Utah. Utah Publication Number 05-37. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 65 pp.  Lentsch, L.D., C.A. Toline, J. Kershner, J.M. Hudson, and J. Mizzi. 2000. Range-wide Conservation Agreement and Strategy for Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah). Publication No. 00-19. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 90pp.  Petty, J. 2004. Level II Riparian Survey Fishlake National Forest: Manning Creek. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Solt, A. 2015. Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project – Hydrology/Soils Specialist Report. USDA Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, UT. 57pp.  Rodriguez, R. 2012. Life History and Analysis of Endangered, Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Dixie National Forest, v.6.0 2011. Cedar City, UT: Dixie National Forest, Supervisor's Office, unpublished report.  Rodriguez, R. L. (compiler). 2006. Life History and Analysis of Endangered, Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest, Ver 4.1. USDA Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, UT. 152 pp.  USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region. 2014a. Fire Operational Guidelines for Preventing the Spread of Aquatic Invasive Organisms.  USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region. 2014b. Fire Technical Guidelines for Preventing the Spread of Aquatic Invasive Organisms.  USDA Forest Service. 1986. Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan.  Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2009. Conservation Agreement and Strategy for Southern Leatherside (Lepidomeda aliciae) in the State of Utah. Publication No. 09-16. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 33pp.  Whelan, J. E. 2015a. Aquatic Specialist Report for Sensitive and MIS Aquatic Species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. USDA Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, UT. 136pp with appendices.  Whelan, J. E. 2002. Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Monitoring Results of the 1995 and 1996 Rotenone Treatments of Manning Creek, Utah. Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Publication No. 02-04. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Salt Lake City. 36pp.   Note on methods used and author experience:  The techniques and methodologies used in this analysis are considered best available science due to the comprehensive analysis and review that included field experience, monitoring records, professional opinion of agency biologists, scientific literature, and other materials which were relevant to evaluating the potential impacts of this project and reasonably foreseeable actions. Specifically the elements used were: Personal experience developed though on-site field visits and survey or monitoring work for data collection from 1999-2015; interaction with UDWR and FWS biologists as part of work programs, field projects, and annual conservation team meetings; Forest records, file data, and the GIS corporate database; responses by UDWR, FWS, and other agencies and NGOs to project scoping and draft document review periods; UDWR conservation monitoring reports for BCT and boreal toads; Life History documents for the Fishlake N.F. (Rodriguez 2006) and Dixie N.F. (Rodriguez 2012); and scientific literature (see references cited in the Aquatic Specialist Report).  This author first worked on projects to restore degraded stream systems in 1985, first worked with native cutthroat trout (threatened Lahontan cutthroat trout) on an interagency survey crew in 1989, was Ely Ranger District Wildlife Biologist for 8 years - including cooperative work to restore native cutthroat trout in Nevada with the Nevada Division of Wildlife, and has been a cooperative interagency Forest Fisheries Biologist on the Fishlake N.F. for the last 16 years - including work to restore native cutthroat trout and work with boreal toads. He concieved and supervised the field study later used by M. Goates to develop his thesis (Goates 2006) and a later publication (Goates et al. 2007). He has co-authored with UDWR many of the monitoring trend reports for BCT on the Fishlake N.F. (see references cited in the Aquatic Specialist Report) and wrote a UDWR publication documenting effects to aquatic macroinvertebrates from restoring Bonneville cutthroat trout to Manning Creek (Whelan 2002). TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction 6 Design Features Common to the Proposed Action 15  Sensitive Species 32  Management Indicator Species 37 Aquatic Field Review 42  Empirical Data from Past Southern Utah Fires 79  Equivalent Roaded Area Analysis 89  Boreal Toad Habitat Impacts 99  General Miscellaneous Effects Discussion 109  Aquatic Sensitive/MIS Summary 110 Section 5. Cumulative Effects 120 Section 6. Determination and Rationale 125 Section 7. Additional Mitigation Measures 126  Boreal Toad Monitoring 126  Other Aquatic Monitoring 127  Additional Recommended Actions 127  Recommended Additional Mitigation Measures 128 Section 8. Compliance with Management Direction 129 Section 8. References 130 Section 9. Definitions 136  Executive Summary This analysis used 7 methods to help quantify the potential impacts of the no action alternative relative to the 4 action alternatives to aquatic resources. These methods were: tiering to the hydrological/soils report, watershed treatment area percentage, equivalent roaded area, spatial review with aquatic biologist professional opinion, amphibian habitat management guideline consistency, key boreal toad habitat proposed for treatment, and key boreal toad habitat proposed road increases. Each of these methods tells a slightly different story as effects vary by alternative, area, and the resource of concern (stream fishery, lake water quality, boreal toad viability, etc.). To help assimilate each of these analysis methods to a common frame of reference a synthesis table was developed (see Appendix K-1). Bonneville cutthroat trout individuals but would not impact the viability of any genetically pure core conservation or genetically valuable conservation populations if the design features are followed. See Table 1a., below. The project would impact individual boreal toads, but would not impact long-term population numbers or viability if the design features are followed and the required monitoring listed in the proposed action (necessary to determine if management needs to be adjusted in response to population trends) is conducted. See Table 1a., below. The project would impact individuals of two aquatic MIS species, but would not impact long-term population numbers or viability for these MIS species populations if the design features are followed. See Table 1b., below.  Mod6 - Monroe Creek In the case of Monroe Mountain, many of these smaller basins that make up the overall larger 6th field subwatershed contain key aquatic resources such as critical broodstocks, sensitive fish species lake habitat, boreal toad breeding sites, and important local fisheries. Treatment of only a portion of a 7th field subwatershed by fire can be difficult, and thresholds have not been defined at this scale, but treatment percentages over the 15% level described above for the 6th fields would be reason for caution. maximal recovery time between implementation of the previously approved projects and this project.   Due to the nature of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project - that treats habitat across the majority of the mountain within or adjacent to boreal toad habitat, treats areas that may affect boreal toad habitat from downstream effects, the recent introduction of chytrid fungus to Monroe Mountain and the likely concurrent boreal toad population decline, and the fact that boreal toads have been petitioned for listing as a threatened species with a status review scheduled to be completed by 2017- active monitoring of boreal toads before, during, and after project implementation is required to determine that project design features work as intended and are effective, the project is implemented as designed, and that site specific findings of toad use areas, timing, etc. can be incorporated into implementation actions. This monitoring is described in the FEIS design features section as part of the proposed action for all action alternatives. This monitoring will ensure that boreal toad impacts are minimized and of a scale that ensures the project will not lead towards federal listing.   Table 1a: Determination of impact on affected aquatic sensitive species. Species   Photo 1: Fall aspen colors, North Fork of Box Creek, 2003.   INTRODUCTION  This Biological Assessment and Biological Evaluation (BABE) and A quatic Management Indicator Specie s (MIS) Report analyzes the potential impacts of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems The purpose of the proposed project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain. The project lies on the Richfield Ranger District of the Fishlake National Forest, in Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah. Monroe Mountain is located approximately 6 to 40 miles south southeast of Richfield running in a north-south direction.  The project area contains a variety of habitat types including aspen, mixed conifer with remnant aspen, high elevation conifer stands, sagebrush, mountain brush, herbaceous forbs and grasses, and streams and lakes with associated riparian habitats. Riparian areas may contain conifers, aspen, cottonwoods, willows, and birch along with a variety of lower shrubs, grasses, sedges, rushes, and forbs. On low to mid elevation slopes pinyon-juniper and low sagebrush are common. The project area encompasses elevations between about 5,600 feet at the lower elevation foothill slope breaks along the Forest boundary to over 11,200 feet on some of the peaks. The majority of the project is sited on the relatively gentle slopes of the plateau top of Monroe Mountain, but some components are on steeper slopes of all aspects, especially on some of the west facing drainages in Monroe Creek south to Dry Creek. SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND NEED  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain will result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to restoring aspen to levels more representative of its long-term level across the landscape, increasing native species biodiversity – both flora and its associated fauna, decreasing fire risk both at the watershed level and reducing the risk of large multiwatershed catastrophic fire, and increased grazing forage.   Project Area Map  Under the No Action Alternative, current management activities would continue. No action would be taken to restore aspen ecosystems and promote aspen regeneration, with secondary effects that reduce fuel buildup and improve terrestrial wildlife habitat conditions. Under this alternative aspen would continue to decline as a valuable cover type on Monroe Mountain, while the risk for large scale, high intensity, high fire [soil] severity, stand replacing wildland fire continues to increase. This increasing fire risk poses a risk to public and firefighter safety as well as property and natural resources. Proposed Action – Action Alternatives  The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. Aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues, and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments. Please see chapter 2 in the FEIS for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative.  Addressing the reduced occurrence of wildland fire due to an increase in wildland fire suppression on Monroe Mountain is critical to the long-term restoration of aspen ecosystems. The maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch DBH, using group, and singletree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years.  Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the alternative. In addition, temporary fencing would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake.  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management).  Proposed Mechanical Treatments Seral and Stable Aspen Stands  There are two mechanical treatment options being considered in this analysis for seral and stable aspen dominated stands: 1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained. In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer. Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods There are also two mechanical treatments options being considered in this analysis for spruce/fir and mixed dominated conifer stands:  1. This option would occur throughout the project area. would be thinned using uneven- aged management4 to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d) If no beetle killed or infested trees are present initially, trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH. In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands.  Table 2. Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 3,146 Stable Aspen 4,025 Spruce/Fir 918 Mixed Conifer 97 Total 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 6,422 Stable Aspen 4,780 Spruce/Fir 2,355 Mixed Conifer 91 Total 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 9,492 Stable Aspen 6,130 Spruce/Fir 4,113 Mixed Conifer 102 Total 19,837 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 6,736 Stable Aspen 5,340 Spruce/Fir 2,905 Mixed Conifer 92 Total 15,073  probability of continued Spruce beetle infestation (Hebertson 2013) and is expected to allow for trees to grow bigger. 4 Uneven-aged management – a planning sequence of treatments designed to maintain and regenerate a stand with three or more age classes (Helms 1998). This is opposed to even-aged management that describes a stand as trees composed of a single age class. Table 3. Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 2,349 797 3,146   Table 4. Proposed prescribed fire treatments.  Existing Vegetation Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen  Figure 1: Vicinity map showing the Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project Area.   Design Features in the Proposed Action  Project design features were developed to minimize negative impacts to wildlife, fish, and aquatic biota species that are present in the project area. The effects determination for aquatic species in this report assumes that these design features are followed. The action alternatives evaluated in this EIS was designed to be consistent with Forest Plan direction. All applicable standards and guidelines (S&Gs) described by the Forest Plan would be implemented as part of these alternatives. The Interdisciplinary Team developed these project-specific preventive measures. The following list are the design features that would be implemented as part of the proposed action which would have the effect of reducing project impacts to aquatic biota: Mechanical Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning, and Prescribed Fire Treatments . All applicable LRMP standards and guidelines would be applied and incorporated into all the action alternatives. . Treated areas would be rested from livestock grazing for two to three growing seasons post implementation, and possibly three to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts. . Invasive and noxious weeds are not known to occur in the proposed treatment areas; however, treatment areas would be monitored post-implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. outside riparian areas in designated locations. . Significant historical and cultural sites identified by the Forest archaeologist would be protected from prescribed fire treatments by the construction of a control line observing a 100-foot buffer from the site. These sites would also be protected from mechanical treatments by observing the same 100-foot buffer from the site. . To provide for firefighter and public safety, some roads and dispersed camping areas may be temporarily closed during prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatment implementation. Temporary closures would be determined by implementation personnel and would be based on the hazards present at the time of implementation. . Within Northern goshawk areas, all applicable Fishlake LRMP Amendment Northern Goshawk Guidelines (USFS 2000) would be followed. For example: . Forest vegetative manipulation (timber harvest, prescribed burning, fuelwood, thinnings, weedings, etc.) would not occur within active nest areas (NA) (approximately 30 acres; i.e. guideline O.) during the active nesting period. The active nesting period would normally occur between March 1 and September 30. . Vegetative treatments are designed to maintain or promote VSS; the percent of the group acreage covered by clumps of trees with interlocking crowns should typically range from 40 to 70 percent in PFAs areas (PFAs) and foraging areas, and 50 to 70 percent in NAs. To manage outside this range, it would either be shown that the range is not within PFC for the site and the biological evaluation process determines that managing outside the range would be consistent with the landscape needs of the Northern goshawk and its prey. The best and most reliable information would be used to make determinations. The District is not proposing to manage outside this range. Groups are made up of multiple clumps of trees. Groups would be of a size and distribution in a landscape that is consistent with disturbance patterns defined in regional or local PFC assessments. Clumps typically have two to nine trees with interlocking crowns. . To help minimize impacts to migratory bird trust resources, coordination with the USFWS would occur as special circumstances arise. . Within the spruce/fir dominated areas, to help minimize impacts from mechanical treatments on cavity nesting birds, thinning activities would usually commence after July 15. . Within the aspen areas, a minimum of 200 snags per 100 acres: 8 inch DBH – 15 feet tall would be retained. Within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas, a minimum of 300 snags per 100 acres: 18 inch DBH – 30 feet tall would be retained. . Within the aspen areas, a minimum of 50 down logs per 10 acres, 6-inch diameter at 8 feet long, and 30 tons per 10 acres would be retained. Within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas, a minimum of 50 down logs per 10 acres, 12-inch diameter at 8 feet long, and 100 tons per 10 acres would be retained. . Livestock grazing permittees would be notified at least 1 year in advance of the treatments that would take place on their allotments. Discussions on to how to best rest the treated areas would occur directly with the permittees. The District would ensure the resting of treatment areas, herding, and electric fences are incorporated into Annual Operating Instructions. These actions would help ensure that permittees are in the communication loop and would give them enough time to plan for the resources they need to continue their operations. . Impacts to permittees would be minimized by the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas and/or stable aspen stands can be rested while nontreatment areas can continue to be grazed. . If any prehistoric cultural features or deposits are encountered during project implementation, activities would be discontinued in the immediate area of the remains, and the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) would be consulted to evaluate their nature and significance. In addition, if any Native American human remains or funerary objects were discovered during implementation they would be immediately reported as required by law. . If project activities inadvertently discover habitation sites, plant gathering areas, human remains, and objects of cultural patrimony, the Historic Preservation Department – Traditional Culture Program would be notified respectively in accordance with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act. Mechanical Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning . Ground based mechanical treatments would only occur on slopes less than 40 percent. . Within riparian areas, equipment operations would occur when soils are dry, frozen or snow levels are sufficient to prevent wheels or tracks from coming in contact with soil. . Cutting methods would include, but are not limited to, feller bunchers, skid-steers attached with saws, and/or hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. These areas may still be mechanically treated with hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. . Jack-strawing on a small scale, in site-specific areas to help impede ungulate access may occur. Prescribed Fire Treatments . Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. . No direct fire ignitions would occur in the stable aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. . No direct fire ignitions would occur in riparian areas on side slopes greater than 40 percent. On side slopes less than 40 percent in riparian areas, prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. Riparian areas would be ignited on the outside edge so that the prescribed fire could back towards the interior of the riparian area. . Pile burning would be limited in riparian areas. No pile burning would occur within a 100 feet of water. Pile burning that does occur within riparian areas would occur when fuel moisture levels are sufficient to limit creep. . Within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. . For prescribed fire implementation, if water needs to be drafted, all water intakes would be equipped with a screen to prevent intake of fish and amphibian species. Drafting sites would be approved by the Forest’s fish biologist prior to use. . Prior to ignition, control lines may need to be constructed around the perimeter of the prescribed fire treatment areas. . Control lines would be constructed with chainsaws, hand tools, and/or skid-steer equipment attached with a fecon head, Marshall saw and/or grapple hooks to primarily remove smaller diameter trees averaging less than 8 inch DBH, limb larger diameter trees, remove 1000 hour fuels, and dig handline. Trees larger than 8 inch DBH that may pose a threat to the effectiveness of the control lines would also be removed. . Efforts would be made to cut trees as close to the ground as possible. tridactylus) are found. . No fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur to preserve Flammulated owl (Otus flammeolus) habitat and populations on Monroe Mountain. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15 and after August 1) would be allowed. Boreal Toad Specific Design Features Design features for boreal toads for landscape scale vegetation projects had not been developed prior to this project. Early in 2014 this author solicited input from a variety of boreal toad professionals, as well as local UDWR biologists. Specific responses were limited, although several people responded that the best general information on habitat are the habitat management guidelines (HMGs) compiled by Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC). Utah is in their southwest region, which currently is having its HMG publication developed, but boreal toads are included in their northwestern U.S. guidelines (Pilliod and Wind 2008), which abut Utah. These guidelines are too general to be considered project specific design features, but are useful as an analysis tool to compare action alternatives in terms of best overall compliance with the HMGs. The PARC northwestern U.S. HMGs are summarized in Appendix F and incorporated into the analysis section.  Definition: Boreal toad mapped habitat is defined as the area within 328 feet (100 meters) from either side of streams that are known to be occupied by Boreal toad, have been occupied by Boreal toad, or are adjacent to occupied habitat and suitable for use by boreal toad and the area within 984 feet (300 meters) of documented breeding sites. . Utilize boreal toad Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) of 328 feet from each side of streams, or from the high water lines of ponds, lakes, and wetlands, as buffers for vegetation treatments. Utilize RHCAs of 984 feet from known boreal toad breeding ponds. . Within the RHCAs, vegetation treatments would be limited to hand treatments, horse, or helicopter thinning up to 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands or up to 328 feet from the known boreal toad breading ponds. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within 100 feet of perennial streams or within 328 feet of breeding ponds, lakes, or other sites unless such treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. o *Any exceptions to this design feature would be for the purpose of improving boreal toad habitat or reducing fire risk to boreal toad habitat, and would be approved by the Forest fisheries biologist. Design feature exceptions would be documented with a map of the area to be treated, any treatment requirements (i.e. timing, method to be used, etc.), and any needed implementation and/or posttreatment monitoring prior to treatment. A summary of monitoring results would be included on the documentation sheet post-treatment. See Appendix M in the Aquatics Specialist Report (Whelan 2015). . Within the RHCAs it is allowable to leave some slash scattered and some slash piles unburned within riparian habitat to create micro habitat for boreal toads. No pile or slash burning would occur within 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands or breeding sites edge. Within the remainder of the RHCAs, pile or slash burning would only occur on slopes and upland soils and habitats (i.e. outside of deep riparian soils and/or true riparian vegetation) during the boreal toad dormant season (October 1 through April 15) unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. . Within the RHCAs, snags (200 per 100 acres in aspen, 300 per 100 acres in mixed conifer spruce/fir, and large downed logs (50 per 10 acres; a minimum of 15 tons per acre) would be retained as cover for toads. . Within the RHCAs, vegetation thinning treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would target less than 60 percent of the stands if treated for complete conifer removal (aspen cover type) or thinning to BA 90 (spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types); or would target less than 80 percent of aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer stands if treated by thinning conifer from below up to 8 inch DBH. . If any unmapped perennial streams, seeps, or other water sources in boreal toad supporting habitat are encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 100-foot buffer. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless these treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. . If any boreal toad hibernacula are encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 328-foot buffer. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. . Temporary roads within the RHCAs would have toad passage friendly culverts installed where culverts are needed (buried culverts or bottomless arched structures) for the duration of the project. . Dipping or drafting water for fire activities from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show a change in water levels from the use would be avoided, except for emergencies. . Monitoring of boreal toad populations (in addition to current levels by the UDWR would be implemented to document project effects and to help plan future vegetation management projects in boreal toad habitat. This would include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations. See Appendix J for additional information. . Within the RHCAs, prescribed burning would occur when generally low to moderate fire intensity and severities would be expected. Prescribed fire personnel would attempt to implement prescribed burning during the boreal toad dormant season (1 October through April 15). . No direct fire ignitions would occur within 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands, and 328 feet from boreal toad hibernacula or breeding ponds, lakes, and other breeding sites unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. Fire ignitions could occur outside these buffers and allowed to back into these areas. . Temporary roads within RHCAs would not be constructed or used for hauling logs until after October 1 of the calendar year, unless surveys and field inspection determine that toads are not likely to be impacted. . For the 7th field HUCS (as delineated for the aquatics CEA): Manning Cr. – Manning Res., Manning Cr. – Barney Lake, Thompson Cr. - Anabella Res, and Water Cr. - Big Lake – vegetation treatments would be limited to 20 percent of the HUC area until watershed function is recovered [comparable] or would be limited to treatments that keep a current Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling of the HUC at or under the recommended Threshold of Concern (TOC) of 10. . Prior to beginning implementation within a HUC6 watershed, the Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling would be repeated for that HUC to incorporate the recovery period (i.e. years from this analysis to the implementation start date) for past projects, allow inclusion of new projects that were previously authorized but not yet carried out or completed during this planning process, and the proposed work. This would help incorporate effects from the currently authorized but not yet implemented or completed work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain/North Clover projects. If the new ERA modeling shows the proposed work would push the HUC over the suggested TOC, multiple entries would occur to reduce cumulative effects to the subwatershed. . The District would coordinate project treatments in watersheds containing Bonneville cutthroat trout or boreal toads with the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources Southern Region fisheries and boreal toad personnel.   General Aquatics Monitoring (FEIS Section 2.3.4.2)  (AIS) control measures and annual reporting requirements are included as part of the monitoring plan.  In addition, the District proposes to monitor fish populations, streamflow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates one time before treatments are implemented if they have not been monitored in the last 5 years. Fish populations, streamflow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates would also be monitored immediately following project implementation and one final time 3 to 5 years following project implementation. Lake water quality monitoring (basic water chemistry, nutrient levels, and secchi disk depths) would also be monitored from fish supporting lakes in the project area before project implementation in that watershed, during project implementation, and 3 to 5 years following project implementation. Monitoring would be conducted monthly during the summer season from approximately May/June through Sept/October. The District also proposes to repeat hydrological channel monitoring stations (cross-sections, longitudinal profiles, and photo points) that were established in or about 2001 on Manning Creek, Barney Creek, Dry Canyon, and Koosharem Creek. These stations would be resampled one time before treatments are implemented, immediately following project implementation, and a final time 3 to 5 years following project implementation.      Photos 3 and 4: The 2003-2004 boreal toad radio tracking study was undertaken to validate whether design features incorporated into the earlier Monroe Mountain Ecosystem Restoration Project were adequate to protect boreal toads. Results are similar to those from later studies in other boreal toad areas. Results from these studies have helped further define the design features incorporated into this project. L – Boreal toad with radio attached. R – Radio tracking a boreal toad on North Fork of Box Creek. Note the beaver pond in the background.     Figures 2 and 3: Boreal toad locations mapped over aerial photos and vegetation maps with 300 foot streamside and 900 foot breeding site buffers (2003-2004 data with original 2000 Monroe Mountain EIS project buffer zones). L - Shows heavy toad use along a small unmapped (in corporate GIS dataset) perennial stream northeast of the lake. R - Shows the importance of the larger buffer around an important breeding lake.   Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails Temporary roads would feature a finished road width of approximately 15 feet and may include turnouts at regular intervals. Road cut slopes would be constructed at a 1:1 vertical-to-horizontal ration and fill slopes at a 1:1.5 ratio. Road surfaces would be outsloped at a 3 to 5 percent slope. The primary road drainage feature would be drain drips, which shall be constructed at regular intervals. Culverts would be installed at any proposed stream crossings.  Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Existing Roads and Skid Trails within Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) for All Action Alternatives . Skid trails and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments. No temporary roads would be constructed inside the IRAs. For areas that cannot be accessed via existing roads, cross-country travel would be allowed to facilitate access to specific stands. . If existing roads and skid trails do not allow for the removal of biomass, trees and slash may be consolidated, piled, and burned on-site. Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails outside Inventoried Roadless Areas for All Action Alternatives . A combination of skid trails, temporary roads, and existing roads would be used to facilitate mechanical treatments. Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of mechanical treatments. Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Roads and Skid Trails Whether they are inside or outside of Inventoried Roadless Areas . No temporary roads would be constructed in Northern goshawk NAs or PFAs. . No skid trails or landings would be constructed inside riparian areas. . To provide for firefighter and public safety, some roads and dispersed camping areas may be temporarily closed during prescribed fire and mechanical treatment implementation. Temporary closures would be determined by implementation personnel and would be based on the hazards present at the time of implementation. Temporary Fencing around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake Regardless of which alternative is selected, treatment areas adjacent to Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake would be fenced to exclude both wildlife and livestock browsing. With fencing, the amount of time needed to acquire a minimum of 1,000 aspen saplings per acre is expected to be quicker. Other vegetation and cover types are also expected to benefit from fencing.  Figure 4. Proposed fencing near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake.          Treatment Sequencing  Treatment sequencing is primarily based on the current distribution of wild browsers on Monroe Mountain. Mechanical and prescribed fire treatments would probably begin in the southerly portion of the project area where visually, current browse pressures on aspen appear to be less than the northerly and central portions of the project area. Following treatments in area 1, treatments in the northerly portion of the project (area 2) would likely be conducted. Browse pressures in the north appear to be higher than what is occurring in the south, but less than the central portion of the project area. Following treatments in areas 1 and 2, treatments in the central portion of the project area (area 3) would likely be initiated next. By generally sequencing the project in this order, browse pressure may be more directed away from newly treated areas; this is expected to increase the probability of regenerating aspen to reach 6 feet tall after treatment. This sequencing regime is general and may change due to on the ground conditions. This sequence may be conducted out of order, or portions of each sequence may be worked on out of sequence depending upon the conditions during project implementation.  Mechanical treatments are proposed in areas adjacent to private lands, and within/adjacent to Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout habitat. These aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas would be treated first within each sequence area (areas 1, 2, and 3). Implementing these mechanical treatments first would help reduce the risk of impacts from prescribed fire to private property, Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout.  SECTION 3: AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT  This section discusses the environment that would be affected, specifically as it relates to aquatic biota. The Forest Service Manual states that wildlife [and fisheries] habitat should be maintained to provide for viable populations of existing and approved introduced wildlife [and fish] species.  The purpose of the proposed project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain. The project lies on the Richfield Ranger District of the Fishlake National Forest, in Sevier County, Utah. Monroe Mountain is located approximately 6 to 40 miles south southeast of Richfield running in a north-south direction.  The project area contains a variety of habitat types including aspen, mixed conifer with remnant aspen, high elevation conifer stands, mountain sagebrush, mountain brush, herbaceous forbs and grasses, and streams and lakes with associated riparian habitats. Riparian areas may contain conifers, aspen, cottonwoods, willows, and birch along with a variety of lower shrubs, grasses, sedges, rushes, and forbs. On low to mid elevation slopes pinyon-juniper and low sagebrush are common.  The project area encompasses elevations between about 5,600 feet at the lower elevation foothill slope breaks along the Forest boundary to over 11,200 feet on some of the peaks. The majority of the project is sited on the relatively gentle slopes of the plateau top of Monroe Mountain, but some components are on steeper slopes of all aspects, especially on some of the west facing drainages in Monroe Creek south to Dry Creek.  The different vegetative communities within the project area provides habitat for a variety of wildlife species. The project area supports mule deer, elk, coyote, bobcat, cougar, rabbits, squirrel, wild turkey, various raptor species, and small rodents. Fish species include native Bonneville cutthroat trout, non-native trout, sterile hybrid trout, and non-game fish. These terrestrial and aquatic wildlife species contribute to ecosystem function in a wide array of habitats and settings. The many lakes, reservoirs, and streams support an active sport fishery. Manning Meadow Reservoir supports a critical Bonneville cutthroat trout broodstock operation that is important in restoring new conservation populations as well as providing the only pure Bonneville cutthroat trout lake fishery on the Fishlake N.F. Barney Lake, with Bonneville cutthroat trout and sterile hybrid tiger trout, is a high quality recreational lake fishery. Amphibian species include boreal toad, boreal chorus frogs, and tiger salamanders. Monroe Mountain is part of the Sevier River Basin, a closed system draining into the Great Basin.  The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources manages the wildlife and fish populations. The Forest Service is responsible to focus on management of habitat to maintain viability of species that are within its jurisdiction. Close cooperation among the various agencies, governments, and other jurisdictions is necessary to provide proper management of wildlife and fisheries resources.    Forest Plan Management Area Description and applicable Goals, General Direction and Standard and Guidelines  The proposed project is primarily located within Management Area 4B – emphasis on Management Indicator Species (MIS). Other Management Areas are 6B – grazing, 7B – timber, 9F – watershed, and 5A – winter range. A small but important area of 4A – fisheries emphasis, is located along Manning Creek. There are Forest-wide goals, objectives, standards and guidelines that apply to maintaining fisheries values in the project area. (USDA Forest Service 1986).   Applicable Forest Plan goals applying to aquatic biota and their habitat across all Management Areas are to: “Protect aquatic habitats which are in good or excellent condition and improve habitats where ecological conditions are below biological potential” (IV-3), “Identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals” (IV-4), “Maintain water quality to meet State standards” (IV-4), and “Maintain productive streams, lakes, and riparian areas…” (IV-4).  Applicable Forest-wide General Direction for trout is to “Manage waters capable of supporting self-sustaining trout populations to provide for those populations” (IV-18). Four Standard and Guidelines tiered to this are: a) Maintain 40% or more overhanging grasses, forbs, sedges, and shrubs along banks of streams, b) Maintain 50% or more of total streambank length in stable condition where natural conditions allow, c) No more than 25% of stream substrate should be covered by inorganic sediment less than 3.2mm in size where natural conditions allow, and d) maintain a [aquatic macroinvertebrate] biologic (sic) condition index (BCI) of 75 or greater (IV- 18, IV-19). There are also Riparian Area Management General Direction and Standards and Guidelines that apply forest-wide. The main applicable direction is “Special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet” (IV-33). The Standard and Guideline for this direction is to “Maintain riparian dependent resource values including wildlife, fish… …in a stable or upward trend” (IV-33 to 34).  There are general management requirements given in the Forest Plan for vegetation treated by burning (FP IV-48 thru 49) that apply to wildlife and fisheries habitat. These are: Use prescribed fire from planned and unplanned ignitions to accomplish resource management objectives, such as reducing fuel load buildup, wildlife habitat improvement, etc. and limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values.  Management Area 4A is managed for emphasis on fish habitat improvement where aquatic habitat is below productive potential. The one area of Management Area 4A within the project area is Manning Creek downstream from Manning Meadow Reservoir to the Forest boundary. It does not include the tributaries. The goals of management are to maintain or improve aquatic habitat condition for fish at or above a good habitat condition rating, maintain stable stream channels, meet water quality standards for cold-water fisheries, and provide healthy, selfperpetuation riparian plant communities (FP IV-85). General direction and standards and guidelines for Management Area 4A are similar to and tier to these goals and can be found in the Forest Plan on pages IV-86 to IV-94. There are two applicable General Directions: “Prevent stream channel instability, loss of channel cross-sectional areas, and loss of water quality resulting from activities that alter vegetative cover.” and “Determine the effects on water quality and sediment yields from vegetation manipulation and road construction projects through the use of appropriate modeling and quantification procedures” (IV-91).  Other Management Areas do not have any specific General Direction or Standards and Guidelines that apply to aquatic biota, but the Forest-wide General Direction and Standards and Guidelines apply across all Management Areas.  Aquatic Biota Cumulative Effects Area  The cumulative effects area (CEA) for the aquatic species that will be analyzed in this document includes the aquatic habitat contained in the sub-watersheds within the Monroe Mountain unit Forest Boundary that contains the project area. See Figure 6 for a map of the modified Hydrological Unit Code (HUC) 6th field watersheds [afterwards called HUC6] that are included in this CEA. Sevier River HUC in Figure 6). In most cases streams become disconnected near the Forest boundary by irrigation diversions. These were often placed near the head of alluvial fans and losing reaches. Due to this disconnect, analysis of the complete HUC below the diversion is unwarranted. It also artificially diminishes the calculated affects from projects on the Forest. Using a pour point at the diversion ensures that the area that supports the aquatic populations and the areas of maximum effects are included in analysis, while extraneous areas that would artificially dilute effects are not.  Therefore, many of the HUC6 subwatersheds were modified to a pour point at the diversion structure, losing reach, or Forest boundary. The redefined HUC6s that support important aquatic resources – major lakes and streams with fish populations and/or boreal toads have been analyzed in more detail using GIS tools for the analysis section of the document. In addition, smaller HUC7 and HUC8 subwatersheds within these HUC6s were broken out where they contained important lakes that are high value for fisheries and boreal toads. To simplify GIS analysis, the GIS runs were done one time for all the polygon pieces. I.e. in upper Manning Creek analysis included one polygon for most of the subwatershed, and two smaller ones that were split out with lakes. For an overview of the whole modified HUC6, the three polygons were recombined into the tables arithmetically.  Starting in the SW corner of the Monroe Mountain CEA and working clockwise, which is the order they are discussed in following sections of the document, the subwatersheds analyzed in detail are: Upper Dry Creek, Upper Manning Creek (with subwatersheds Barney Lake and Manning Reservoir), the subwatershed Hunts Lake in Dry Canyon (the main Dry Canyon does not support aquatic resources with the exception of some potential and relatively minor boreal toad use areas in the headwaters), Monroe Creek (with subwatershed Magleby Lake), Thompson Creek - only some GIS criteria were developed due to the HUC configuration (including subwatershed Annabella Reservoir), Water Creek - only some GIS criteria were developed due to the HUC configuration (including subwatershed Big Lake), Koosharem Creek, Greenwich Creek, and Box Creek – split into upper and lower subwatersheds.      Figure 6: Project Area HUC6 and HUC7 Map and Cumulative Effects Area (see text for additional description).     Threatened, Endangered, and Candidate Species  Current policy for Threatened and Endangered species as stated in the Forest Service Manual 2670.3 (WO Ammendment 2600-95 - 7; USDA Forest Service 1995) includes the following direction:   Place top priori ty on conservation and recovery of endangered, threatened, and proposed species and their habitats through relevant National Forest System, State and Private Forestry, and Research activities and programs.  2. Establish through the Forest planning process objectives for habitat management and/or recovery of populations, in cooperation with States, the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) (or National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)), and other Federal agencies. 2. As part of the National Environmental Policy Act process, review programs and species. 3. Avoid or minimize impacts to sp ecies whose viability has been identified as a concern. 4. If impacts cannot be avoided, analyze the significance of potential adverse effects on the population or its habitat within the area of concern and on the species as a whole. (The line officer, w ith project approval authority, makes the decision to allow or disallow impacts, but the decision must not result in loss of species viability or create significant trends toward Federal listing.)  States when projects on National Forest System lands may have a significant effect on sensitive species population numbers or distributions. Establish objectives for Federal candidate species, in cooperation with the FWS or NMFS and the States. The Fore st Service follows a two -tier planning process. The first tier is  the Fishlake Land and Resource Management Plan (Forest Plan); the second is  the site-specific project planning level which is represented by the NEPA analysis.  normally considered for recovery purposes. Bonneville Cutthroat Trout Oncorhynchus clarki utah S/MIS X Within historic native range. A Bonneville cutthroat trout (BCT) core conservation population exists in project area waters in Manning Creek and its tributaries. Manning Meadow Reservoir is a critical southern region UDWR BCT broodstock. The Manning Creek drainage has the only BCT conservation lake habitat on the Forest. BCT are managed under a Conservation Agreement that the Forest Service R-4 is a member signatory of (Lentsch 2000 rangewide and BVCT State of Utah Conservation Team 2008 for Utah). Rodriguez (2006) has life history information and overall Forest trend information on Bonneville cutthroat trout. Southern Leatherside* Lepidomeda aliciae may now be starting to be evident in some areas of Monroe Mountain. Besides their Forest Service sensitive species status they are considered a state sensitive species in Utah and managed under a UDWR Conservation Plan that other agencies are not signatories to (Hogrefe et al. 2005).  Life history information regarding Bonneville cutthroat trout can be found in Life History and Analysis of Endangered Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez, 2006, hereby incorporated by reference). This document contains summarized population trend and monitoring information, which can also be found in Hadley et al. (2011a) and Hepworth et al. (2003). For general life history information on boreal toads this report tiers to Rodriguez (2012) and Hogrefe et al. (2005). The U-W-C Habitat recommendations also include some general toad information, although more geared towards northern Utah (Appendix E). Finally, Goates et al. (2007) and Goates (2006) provides life history information gleaned from the 2003-2004 radio tracking project established to validate design features developed for an earlier Monroe Mountain planning project. Additional boreal toad information on habitat use, movements, and response to treatments is also found in the analysis section.  Due to population declines throughout their range, boreal toads were petitioned for listing as a threatened species. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service determined that the Southern Rocky Mountain population did not warrant listing, but that the Eastern Clade (which occurs in Utah) did warrant a full status review. Higher priority species are currently ahead of boreal toads in the process, but the full status review must be completed by FWS by September 2017. It is important that boreal toad habitat and population levels in the project area not be adversely affected by project activities, as it could add pressure towards a listing decision.  To aid the reader, a short general (uncited – see above for sources of more specific information) synopsis of boreal toad general life history and habitat use on Monroe Mountain is included. Boreal toads inhabit areas of Monroe Mountain over 8,000 feet, typically over 8,500 feet. Across their range they use many habitat types and are known to occasionally travel cross country considerable distances, even going over mountain passes in Colorado. On Monroe Mountain they seem fairly closely tied to water, however, in the professional opinion of this writer due to the warmer and drier conditions than often found in their range. They use small mammal burrows (Photo 7) for cover and hibernate through the winter typically in a root chamber, associated with spruce-fir and willows, over a small perennial stream (Photos 28 and 29). Beaver dams are important habitat features (Photos 4 and 8), and can also serve as hibernacula. They emerge from hibernation in early spring, breeding in slack water (ponds to depressions). By mid-summer they disperse across the landscape, usually along streams, moving towards hibernacula in late summer. Tadpoles emerge as small toadlets in late summer, usually (based on literature studies in other areas) experiencing high mortality (adult survival, minus special stressors, is usually fairly high). Experience on Monroe has shown they occur in relatively low density even in prime habitat. Chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobadidis, also known as B.d.) has been a major factor in boreal toad population declines across their range. Monroe Mountain had been considered chytrid free, with 2006 samples all negative, but in 2012 samples documented chytrid in the Manning Creek watershed at Manning Reservoir and Barney Lake and the Monroe Creek watershed at Magleby Reservoir. Surveys in 2013 found chytrid at all locations submitted for testing, but not every sample (i.e. toad) was positive (Fishlake N.F. file data). Maintaining healthy riparian areas along streams and lakes with cool microsites (toads favor warm shallow water for laying their eggs to speed tadpole development, but need cooler and moister conditions for themselves on land), large wood (Photos 5 and 6), diverse habitats with minimal human disturbance, good water quality in lakes, and good watershed function in streams are all important for long-term boreal toad persistence.  : the risk that toads can become trapped and entombed in burrows that are crushed by equipment. Boreal toad in burrow in upper Manning Creek. -  Aquatic MIS that were selected for the Fishlake NF include Bonneville cutthroat trout (emphasis MIS and also a R4 Forest Service sensitive species), resident trout, and aquatic macroinvertebrates. Trout species that represent resident trout in the project area are brown, cutthroat, rainbow and brook trout. Information regarding MIS can be found in Life History and Analysis of Endangered Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez, 2006). This document contains summarized population trend and monitoring information for the Fishlake N.F. Site specific and more recent information is included in this aquatic biota report, while more general information can be found in the Life Histories document (hereby incorporated by reference).  Many of the selected MIS occur and range far beyond a local scale such as a project analysis area. Individuals, family groups, or herds of some animals such as elk or birds, annually use areas much larger area than a typical project area and population trend must be examined on a much larger scale to be meaningful. For National Forest Management Act implementation, this scale is the Fishlake National Forest. For aquatic species, populations are often best monitored at the watershed or sub-watershed scale (depending on species distribution, barriers, etc.). For aquatic species such as trout, population samples can be obtained at the project level to determine the approximate number utilizing habitat within the project area. Samping is easier for true aquatic species since they are confined to the water habitat. At a site-specific project level there is fluctuation in numbers, however, due to both yearly variations and spatial shifts of individuals. These population samples are really index samples rather than true population estimates. It would be difficult to detect minor changes in local numbers using an area, but large changes due to major habitat degradations or major habitat improvements have been noted in Forest sampling. It must be kept in mind that a individual project area may contribute to the total population trend but does not usually make up the entire population and trend, unless they are a locally endemic or restricted species. For this reason, it is not necessarily always appropriate to determine population trend at a local level.  Population trend for threatened, endangered and candidate species is addressed using recovery plans or conservation assessments, strategies and agreements. These broad scale documents are used because they occur and range far beyond the scale of the forest.  The following information was used to determine if aquatic management indicator species or their habitat is present within the project area: . Life History and Analysis of Endangered, Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez, 2006). Table 6: Names and status of aquatic MIS species known or suspected to occur in the Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project area, Richfield Ranger District, Fishlake National Forest, as well as the occurrence of suitable habitat. S ABITAT IN REA Rationale/Comments Salvelinus namaycush Salmo trutta X Oncorhynchus Salmo gairdneri Richardson X Salvelinus fontinalis Occurs in project area. Stocked into Box Creek Reservoirs. Common in upper Box Creek and headwaters of Monroe Creek. X  Fig ure 7 . Stream Fisheries Resources of Monroe Mountain.  Figure 8 : Mapped key boreal toad habitat.   AQUATIC FIELD REVIEW    General Field Inspections Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types ort fish. Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory Boreal Toad Dry Creek was first surveyed for boreal toads in recent times in 1998, when several juvenile toads and about 500 tadpoles were seen in 3 different areas in the upper Dry Creek drainage, including a small pond, a small pond near the Dry Creek Guard Station, and a stock watering pond (Fridell et al. 2000). Boreal toad reproduction could often be found at this stock pond in the 2000-2010 timeframe. This area was studied with radio tracking in 2003-2004, including by this author, documenting movements between the stock pond and Dry Creek Guard Station (results summarized in Goates et al. 2007 and Goates 2006). Five boreal toads were found on two tributaries of Dry Creek in 2014 UDWR surveys (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). It was the first time these tributaries had been surveyed for boreal toads.    Upper Manning Creek HUC6- 160300030104 (Manning Creek, Manning Meadow Reservoir, Barney Lake)  General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist on Manning Creek from 1999 to 2014. These field visits showed that overall the Manning Creek watershed is in good condition. Use levels range from moderate to relatively high but generally within standards in the uppermost watershed, depending on the year and weather conditions, by both livestock and elk. There are other land use impacts in this area, including high levels of ATV use, dispersed camping, and general recreational use, and cabin development on private land. Below the road crossing the stream becomes quickly inaccessible with nearly pristine conditions. The lower watershed near the Forest boundary does have some impacts from livestock trailing up Straight Canyon, which is an intermittent tributary, a low-standard road, and an old diversion structure.  Nutrient loading is known to be a problem in Manning Meadow Reservoir. The underlying geology on Monroe Mountain is high in phosphates. Activities that disturb the soil and put sediment into watercourses can increase nutrient levels, as can wildfires and prescribed burning. Animal manure is also high in nutrients. Cattle graze the area above Manning Meadow Reservoir and there are also high numbers of elk using the area. Finally, cabin development on private land above the reservoir is likely contributing nutrients from septic systems. The Forest collected additional water quality monitoring samples in cooperation with the State of Utah in late 2006/early 2007. Water samples show high phosphate levels in the lake and low oxygen levels at depth. Petty (2004:p6) recommendations were “The management of Manning Creek appears to be maintaining stable hydrologic and vegetation resources… …Cattle grazing was most apparent during our survey in reaches F1-30 through F1-33, although forage resources are maintaining adequate cover and vigor through what appears to be moderate utilization. However, annual utilization surveys in these upper meadows would insure these valuable resources are maintained. Trout are thriving in the creek and habitat is well maintained.”  Barney Creek  Barney Creek is marginal, and fish surveys only found trout use in the lower half. Petty (2004) surveyed the stream and did not note fish. Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 10.7 % and a mean Pfankuch stability rating of 48.7, which is considered good. Barney Creek was mostly “A” channels with the lowest reach being a “B” channel type. The primary resource issue of concern Petty (2004) noted was ATV use, documenting pioneering ATV use down the creek below the reservoir. Petty (2004) did not observe any evidence of cattle grazing along Barney Creek. Collins Creek  The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 97, which is considered fair. Petty (2004) noted that this was the only area in the Manning Creek watershed where he observed heavy cattle grazing. Petty (2004) recommended that cattle grazing management should be investigated in this drainage, especially the trailing along the creek. Petty (2004) also noted ATV problems in this drainage.  IRE Streambank Stability Summary  When adjusted for channel type, the Pfankuch stability ratings for Manning Creek and its tributaries were 77.5 % good, 14.4% fair, and 8.1% poor (see Appendix I, Table I-2).  Project Area Fisheries Surveys   Stream Monitoring  Manning Creek and its tributaries were monitored for fisheries in 2001 by electroshocking. The data is summarized in Hepworth et al. (2003). Three stations were conducted along the mainstem, the lowermost on the BLM, the middle a little above the Forest boundary, and the upper near the confluence with Collins Creek. Some of the most pristine and difficult to access terrain was not monitored. If the native Bonneville cutthroat trout are doing well at the monitoring sites selected, however, they will also be doing well in the more rugged stream reaches. The 2001 data found 451 fish/mile and 40 lbs/acre at the upper station a little below the road crossing below Manning Meadow Reservoir. The station near the Forest boundary in the lower part of the project area had 933 fish/mile and 92 lbs/acre. Finally, the BLM site had 515 fish/mile and 52 lbs/acre (data in Hepworth et al. 2003). This data shows good fish numbers and about average biomass. Reproduction and multiple age classes were found in all parts of the stream. Given the relatively recent reintroduction of Bonneville cutthroat trout into this stream following renovation treatments in 1996, the results of this monitoring was considered satisfactory. Manning Creek was re-monitored 1n 2008, the data are summarized in Hadley et al. (2011a). Occupied stream miles stayed the same for the mainstem and all tributaries. When all 3 stations were averaged, the 2008 sampling showed a 13% increase in fish biomass compared to 2001 (Hadley et al. 2011a).  Three tributaries were also monitored. Barney Fork is marginal and fish only use the lower half of the stream. In 2001 this station had 64 fish/mile and 5.2 lbs/acre (Hepworth et al. 2003). By 2008 this station’s biomass had increased an incredible 350% (Hadley et al. 2011a). It is likely that wetter conditions and thus higher stream flow attracted more fish up this drainage compared to the earlier sample. In 2001 East Fork of Manning Creek also has low flow, and had 32 fish/mile and 12.9 lbs/acre (Hepworth et al. 2003). In 2008 East Fork of Manning Creek station’s biomass had negligibly increased (<10%, Hadley et al. 2011a). The slightly larger Vale Creek had 821 fish/mile and 12.8 lbs/acre in 2001(Hepworth et al. 2003). By 2008 Vale Creek station’s biomass had increased 21% (Hadley et al. 2011a). It appears that these tributary streams are all important spawning areas for Bonneville cutthroat trout.  Photo 10 (next page): Manning Meadow Reservoir is a popular high quality recreational fishery after the early season fishing restrictions to protect the broodstock operation are lifted on the 2nd Saturday in July. Here a pontoon boat fisherman is landing a Bonneville cutthroat trout.  More recent egg take figures are included in Hadley and Hepworth (2013). Egg numbers peaked in 2011 at over 600,000 but took a large decline in 2013 with only 228,000 eggs collected (Hadley and Hepworth 2013). These lower numbers can be problematic, as some fish are lost in In 2014 the Manning Meadow broodstock spawning operation collected over 500,000 BCT eggs. Good survival in the hatchery led to an abundance of BCT for fall stocking. These high numbers of BCT were crucial, in addition to normal uses/waters, as considerable BCT were needed for jump starting the Clear Creek metapopulation following the completion of rotenone treatments that followed severe fish declines from post-fire flooding off the Twitchell Canyon fire. This included conservation population stocking in lower Clear Creek, Mill Creek, Fish Creek, upper Clear Creek, and Shingle Creek. In addition, a supplemental plant of BCT was made into Pine Creek (Bullion Canyon) and a sport-fish planting in Oak Creek. With many tens of miles of fish habitat needing reintroductions, the Manning Meadow broodstock was a critical resource in this projects success (Photo 13 below). Gill netting of Manning Meadow Reservoir takes place each year with broodstock operations, in part to monitor population status, critical for maintaining egg take, and also to help in fish collection for disease certification. Hadley (2013a) is the latest report on lake monitoring. Hadley (2013a) found that the low numbers of eggs taken in 2013 were due to an issue with the 2009 plant (cohort), but that the 2010 stocking was doing well, which would indicate a likely increase in eggs in 2014 [which turned out to be the case]. Hadley (2013a) recommended maintaining the current stocking regime.  natural reprod i - take fishery, habitat conditions are secondary up to the point that they are not d etrimental to the fishery. Increasing sedimenation of the lake was noted due to ATV use around the lake in the late 2000s, which did raise habitat concerns.  ). ke was gill netted in summer 2008 (Hadley 2008) and 2013 (Hadley 2013 Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  Four aquatic macroinvertebrate sample stations have been collected on the Fishlake N.F. portion of Manning Creek since 1988 in the project area. A comprehensive analysis of aquatic macroinvertebrates on Manning Creek was undertaken to assess the effects of the renovation treatments on them, and determine if additional mitigation measures were necessary (Whelan 2002). This monitoring shows that the upper watershed stations have generally been above the Forest Plan standard and guideline level with static trend. The lowest station near the Forest boundary had been below the Forest Plan standard and guideline level with static trend (Whelan 2002). The reasons for the lower score near the Forest boundary are not fully understood, but are likely partially related to effects from the low-standard road, a diversion structure (impacts from the construction and maintenance of this structure were noted by Petty (2004), and livestock trailing/use up Straight Canyon. Boreal Toad  The upper Manning drainage was first surveyed in modern times in 1995, when numerous adults and 10 egg stands were documented in Manning Meadow Reservoir and 32 adult toads were seen at the Manning Barney confluence (Fridell et al. 2000). The beaver ponds at this confluence were re-checked in 1996 and 3 toads and 28 tadpoles were observed (Fridell et al. 2000). Numerous areas were checked in 1997 when 6 toads were found at the confluence in spite of the beaver dam being breached (i.e. poorer habitat). At Barney Lake 25 toads were found and observed leaving and entering small mammal burrows. They also documented a boreal toad mortality in 1997 on Forest Road 083 (Fridell et al. 2000). In 1998 surveys documented 4 adults and 580+ tadpoles at Manning Meadow Reservoir, several adults at the Manning/Barney confluence, a boreal toad on East Fork of Manning Creek, and 29 adults and 530 tadpoles at Barney Lake (Fridell et al. 2000).  The Manning Creek drainage was considered a key boreal toad area in the early 2000s, where toads, egg masses, and tadpoles were always easy to find. It was a core area studied in the 2003- 2004 radio tracking study (Goates et al. 2007, Goates 2006; also see Figures 2 and 3 for examples of toad location data plotted in this drainage). would have been considered unfathomable 10 years earlier. The UDWR breeding surveys should be considered presence/absence, and it is not considered reliable to infer trend data from it (K. Wheeler, UDWR Native Aquatics biologist, email communication 7/28/14). In 2014 surveys of less checked areas, one boreal toad was encountered in 2014 between the Barney/Manning confluence and Collins Creek and a dead boreal toad was found at White Ledge Spring (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). These surveys found heavy grazing in the East Fork of Manning Creek drainage.   Dry Canyon HUC6 - 160300030303 (Hunts Lake)  Pro  No fish surveys  occur in Hunts Lake .    Boreal Toad   The headwaters of Monroe Creek are important boreal toad habitat. They have not been well looked at for other uses.   Project Area Fisheries Surveys   A fish population transe ct was sampled on lower Monroe Creek near Monrovian Park in about 2000. This survey found good biomass, but it was comprised of very high numbers of small wild rainbow trout. This drainage needs additional fisheries surveys.   Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  No aquatic macroinvertebrate samples have been collected from Monroe Creek. They should be collected in conjunction with future fisheries surveys.  Boreal Toad  Magleby Reservoir, which sits on private land, has been known for some time as an important boreal toad area. UDWR surveys in 2010 documented 4 adult toads and over 1,500 tadpoles in 5 groups (implying 5 egg masses and reproduction events) (Lien and Wheeler 2010).  Two boreal toads were found on surveys of upper Monroe Creek in 2014 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014) where a previous survey in 2001 found 4 adults, 6 juveniles, and over 350 tadpoles. One adult female boreal toad was observed at Magleby Reservoir in 2014 (Wheeler 2014).  Thompson Creek HUC6- 160300030314 (Annabella Reservoir, Deep Lake)  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types   Annabella Reservoir and Deep Lake are basically put-and-take recreational fisheries based on annual stocking with no over-wintering of fish (see Hadley 2014 for additional information). Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  As noted above, due to the lack of trout supporting streams, aquatic macroinvertebrate sampling does not apply.  Boreal Toad  UDWR surveys at Deep Lake in 2010 found 4 adult and 1 dead juvenile toad (Lien and Wheeler 2010). Survey of a meadow north of Deep Lake found 1 adult and 1 juvenile toad, with deep ATV ruts made through the meadow, although a recent closure appeared to block further ATV traffic through the meadow (Lien and Wheeler 2010).  No boreal toads were observed at Deep Lake in 2014, despite the fact that they have been observed there most years since 2000 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014) and the fact that the 2013 survey found seven adults and six egg strands. One boreal toad was found in surveys of 10 ponds near Annabella Lake (Wheeler and McCormick 2014).   Water Creek HUC6- 160300030316 (Big Lake)  General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist while traveling through the area several times 1999 and 2014. Some livestock grazing use was noted around the reservoirs, but there was also disturbance from ATVs and recreational use around the lakes. The primary concern noted with these lakes is water fluctuation due to water management and a propensity to winter kill due to the shallow water levels. Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types   In 2007 hook-and-rod sampling was conducted at Big Lake in early summer. Several catchable rainbow trout were caught in less than an hour, which shows good sport fishing conditions. Big Lake is basically a put-and-take recreational fishery based on annual stocking with no overwintering of fish (see Hadley 2014 for additional information).  As noted above, due to the lack of trout supporting streams, aquatic macroinvertebrate sampling does not apply. Boreal Toad  This author has seen adult boreal toads and tadpoles in Big Lake in the 2000-2010 timeframe. Surveys in 2013 found 11 boreal toads and over 1000 tadpoles on the Central Pasture / Christensen Spring tributary above Big Lake, where much of the habitat surveyed was within conifer stands (Wheeler 2013). Boreal toads were also observed in Henries Hollow and Long Flat tributaries a boreal toad and about 190 tadpoles in the White Pine Creek tributary (Wheeler 2013).   Koosharem Creek HUC6- 160300030406 (Koosharem Creek)  General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist in the project area between 1999 and 2014. These field visits showed that the mid-lower elevation ranges of these creeks are generally inaccessible to livestock and motorized vehicle use and are in good to excellent condition. The upper elevation ranges are more accessible to livestock, motorized vehicle use, and other human recreational impacts. Wildlife use levels, both deer and elk, are also high. Koosharem Creek is in generally in better condition than many Monroe Mountain upper elevation streams, however.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types Petty (2006b:p2) noted on Koosharem Creek that, “The aquatic habitat seemed adequate to support a fishery, however, fish were rarely seen and not seen at all above reach N1-9. The trout noted in the lower reaches were thought to be German browns. Aquatic habitat may be limited by deep pools and cover habitat.”  IRE Streambank Stability Summary  ect Area Fisheries Surveys Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory There are no aquatic macroinvertebrate monitoring stations on upper Koosharem Creek. One station was collected just upstream from the diversion on lower Koosharem Creek in 2010. Based on a preliminary predicted value (CTQp) of 50 the BCI at this station was 69, which is slightly below the Forest Plan standard and guideline level. The proper CTQp level for this station may need further investigation. Boreal Toad Boreal toads have been known from upper Koosharem Creek for some time, and have been seen by this author in the 2000-2010 timeframe. In the 2002-2004 timeframe an interesting finding one summer was boreal toad breeding in a tire track crossing a small seep on a rutted road into a timber sale. No boreal toads were found in UDWR surveys of Milo’s Kitchen in 2014 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014) but the area appeared to be good habitat for boreal toads.  General Field Inspections  On the Thurber Creek tributary to Greenwich Creek Petty (2006b) noted that the upper watershed was gentler, with a mean gradient of 8% and a mix of Rosgen “A”, “B”, and “C” stream channel types. The lower stream had a mean gradient of 16% and was composed of Rosgen “A” channel types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 83, which is considered fair, but reach M5-6 was rated as poor. Petty (2006b) found this stream to be water limited for supporting a fishery, and recommended better grazing management in livestock accessible areas.  When adjusted for channel type, the Pfankuch stability ratings for Greenwich Creek and its tributaries were 57.1% good, 6.3% fair, and 36.6% poor (see Appendix I, Table I-4). Project Area Fisheries Surveys There are no fish population monitoring stations on Greenwich Creek. Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory Boreal toads are known to use these drainages. Toads were radio tracked in this watershed by this author in the trial year of 2002, but due to lower toad density and the desire for larger sample sizes, the area was not included in the 2003-2004 project. Surveys in 2013 did not document any boreal toads (Wheeler 2013). Box Creek HUC6- 160300020408 (Box Creek, Box Creek Reservoirs)  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types Petty (2006a) measured the average gradient below upper Box Creek reservoir as 8%. The stream was mostly Rosgen “A” type channels with the lower 2 reaches being “B” channels. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 64, which would be considered good. When Petty (2006) was conducting his survey he found high water discharges (~20cfs) from the dams in early September, which was causing some resource concerns.  Petty (2006a:p3) noted about the lower section of Box Creek that, “The aquatic habitat below the lower reservoir is protected from grazing in all but reach M1-10, where the stream is being impacted by very heavy cattle grazing. Beaver have built a series of dams on reaches M1-9 and M1-8 that provide deep-water habitat; trout are abundant in this area.” Petty (2006a) also noted that, “The stream in the lower reaches is well shaded by dense stream bank shrubs.” Petty (2006a) measured the average gradient on North Fork of Box Creek at 4.0%. The stream was mix of Rosgen “A” and “B” channels types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 63, which would be considered good. Petty (2006a) found grazing use on North Fork of Box Creek to be moderate. In his recommendations Petty (2006a:p22) noted, “Current management of North Fork Box Creek appears to be maintaining stable hydrologic and vegetation resources. Evidence of cattle grazing was not noted in the riparian and impacts by livestock grazing appear minimal. However, because beaver activity is critical within this watershed for trout deep water habitat and boreal toads, potential conflicts with livestock grazing should be closely monitored to ensure adequate regeneration of shrubs and trees used by beaver.”  Petty (2006a:p3) noted about the upper South Fork that, “The aquatic habitat above the upper reservoir is limited due to stream instability, lack of shade and the abundance of fine sediment. This area is not near its aquatic functioning potential, primarily due to impacts from livestock grazing. Trout were frequently seen in this creek, although fish of over 6 inches were seldom seen [this may be primarily due to brook trout stunting from overbreeding, a trait common to this trout species], despite the abundance of beaver ponds and deep-water habitat.” Petty (2006a) generally found grazing to be heavy on grass in the upper watershed.   The west fork of the North Fork of Box Creek was extensively monitored for fisheries and aquatic effects from the Oldroyd wildfire (Whelan 2003). Two stations were established, one above a high severity burned reach and one at the lower end of the high severity burned reach. The fishery in this area was dominated by brook trout and the mean fish size was quite small. Stream flow was very low, below levels (.5cfs late summer) that trout can typically survive in, but the presence of deep holding pools allowed this stream reach to support the larger trout; the shallow riffle areas were used by the young fish (Whelan 2003). There are no fish population monitoring stations on South Fork of Box Creek. The intermittent nature of the upper and lower portions of this Creek, with trout restricted to beaver ponds and the middle more inaccessible reaches, makes stream population transect monitoring unfeasible for many parts of the creek. Periodic walk through inspections of the drainage to monitor the distribution of trout is recommended instead. Lower Box Creek reservoir was checked by J.Whelan, Fishlake N.F. fisheries biologist in summer 2013, following receiving a complaint from an angler from Las Vegas, NV. Apparently the Box Creek reservoirs was their planned fishing/camping destination the previous fall, but they found the water quality to be so poor (particularly the lower reservoir) as to be unsatisfactory [the descriptions used by the complainant are not suitable for use in a report like this], requiring them to change locations. During the 2013 visit, a considerable algal bloom was noted including cyanobacteria (blue-green algae pond scum), indicative of nutrient issues, on the lake. Probable sources of the excess nutrients are the volcanic geology, livestock grazing (cows were around the lake during the visit), the road accessing the lake (all water off the road drains into the lake), and the upstream vegetation treatments and 2012 planned Box Creek fire that escaped prescription. Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory One aquatic macroinvertebrate station was collected from South Fork of Box Creek just above upper Box Creek reservoir in 1999. The BCI at this station was below the Forest Plan standard and guideline level (Rodriguez 2006). Intermittent stream flow and beaver activity may be part of the reason for the low level, as when this station was revisited for later samples it was determined that the water was generally stagnant and the station could not be repeated (this was a drought year; the station supports flowing water in good years). Therefore there is no trend data for this station. No boreal toads were seen in a survey on a North Fork side tributary in 2013 surveys (Wheeler 2013). Eight adult boreal toads were observed in 2013 surveys on South Fork of Box Creek tributaries in 2013, with areas of heavy grazing, willow browsing, and abundant elk sign noted (Wheeler 2013). Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Summary Information    7  CI) Note: Older BCI data for the table is found in Mangum (various dates) and Vinson (various dates). These reports are on file at the Fishlake N.F. Supervisor’s Office. Sample results for 2010 are in a spreadsheet from the USU Buglab, which is included in the project record.              *Used original CTQp=53 **Used original CTQp=50 +Used preliminary CTQp=50                STATION YEAR  88 90 95 97 99 00 01 03 10 Manning T 81 77/84 76 73 79 - - 71 - Manning 7.0 - - - - 79 - - 73 - Manning L - - 66 65 63 - - - - Manning 3 - - - 70 - - - - - Barney Cr - - - - - - - 78 - Koosharem 01 - - - - - - - - 69+  Direct effects are impacts that directly result in the death of a fish. One example would be a water quality impact such as a major chemical spill. Another example would be equipment in a creek that directly crush and kills trout eggs are incubating in the gravel. Given the required design features listed for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project, direct effects to fisheries and aquatic biota are considered generally unlikely to occur, with the exception of a low but real risk to boreal toads of direct injury from vehicles or equipment. Indirect effects are impacts that are not directly connected in space and time. One example would be the spread of an aquatic invasive species that changes the ecology of an aquatic habitat, indirectly reducing the habitat quality for a native species. Another example would be sediment from a disturbance that embeds gravels, reducing spawning success and decreasing aquatic macroinvertebrate food production. The activities associated with this project are relatively low risk for aquatic invasive species (AIS) transfer provided the required design features are followed. Prescribed fire can affect aquatic habitat and biota. Direct effects include heating or abrupt changes in water chemistry. Indirect effects include changes to the hydrologic regime, erosion, debris flows, woody debris, and riparian cover. All of these effects are dependent on numerous factors including fire intensity, its extent and location within a watershed, the amount and type of fuel consumed and left, soil type, soil fire temperatures, fire severity, and the frequency, timing, and intensity of precipitation events (Robertson 1997b) Indirect the same time and place (40 CFR 1508.8). occur later in time or farther from the activity, but are still sonably foreseeable (40 CFR The primary potential for indirectly impacting fish, aquatic macroinvertebrates, or aquatic habitats would be from the introduction of fine sediment to the streams. Fine sediment can change the species composition, diversity, and abundance of macroinvertebrates as well as suffocating trout eggs and fry (Robertson 1997a). The use of design features, mitigation measures, best management practices, and following the soil and water conservation handbook reduces the amount of sediment reaching the stream.  Key comparison elements for evaluating how the alternatives affect sensitive and management indicator species are:  Other aquatic resources –  C:\Users\asolt\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\ZO3J3A7U\Monroe_EIS_Proposed_Fencing_Map.jpg    Figure 9: Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in Alternative 2.   Figure 10: Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in Alternative 3.    Figure 11: Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in Alternative 4.   Figure 12: Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in Alternative 5.   General Fire and Mechanical Treatment Aquatic Effects Discussion  Belt et al. (1992: 3:2) note that riparian buffer strips provide three basic roles: 1) they maintain the hydrologic, hydraulic, and ecological integrity of the stream channel, soil, and vegetation, 2) they filter and trap nutrients and sediments, and 3) they provide food, cover, and thermal protection to fish and wildlife. See Belt et al. (1992 5:6) for discussion on the role of buffer zones in managing cumulative effects to riparian areas.  On the Monongahelia N.F. Duffield (no date: p4, p7) found a moderate inverse correlation between the percent fines in spawning gravels and biomass of fish in B channel types, and a highly significant inverse correlation between age 1 fish and sediment in B channel types, showing that in these moderate gradient stream channel types increasing sediment levels do have an effect on trout populations. Correlations were weaker in A and G channel types.   Stream temperatures are a factor of concern for salmonids, and not just in the relatively arid and warm environments of the Western U.S. According to Teti (2003 p1) stream temperature is of concern even in British Columbia, and sockeye salmon have been reported to lose weight above 17 deg C, indicating stress. Monitoring of stream temperatures on the Fishlake N.F. since 2001 has found peak summer temperatures to be of concern on several streams (unpublished FNF file data). Experience sampling trout on the Forest since 2001, particularly in the hotter and dryer summers of 2002 and 2003, has shown that trout in water 20 deg C or higher are clearly stressed and much more vulnerable during electroshocking sampling work. These high peak water temperatures have been correlated with low fish numbers during sampling on UM Creek (Hepworth et al. 2010). Temperature  reduce winter water temperature. Conversely, other studies reviewed by Belt et al. (1992 5:4) showed that riparian buffer strips were effective in preventing stream temperature increases in clear-cut areas. Stream morphology can affect the streams sensitivity to changes; shallow streams will tend to heat and cool more rapidly (Teti 2003 p4).  Figure 14: Riparian Forest Effects on Streams (From FEMAT 1993 Chap 5)    Figure 14 shows that a buffer width of about 1 tree height, or about 100 feet for this project area out from the stream on each side will provide nearly 100% effectiveness for shading and maintaining coarse woody debris to the stream. Nutrients  According to Belt et al. (1992 2:3) effectiveness of buffer strips as nutrient filters has not been examined extensively in scientific literature. Slash burning within a buffer strip can increase nutrients supplied to streams. Belt et al. (1992 4:3) also reviewed one study that showed some effects of slash burning could be reduced by passage through the riparian buffer. Thus the effects of slash burning could vary widely from beneficial to harmful depending on the background nutrient level in the soil and water, amount of material burned, buffer zone distance between the burned material and the creek, and weather. Belt et al. (1992 5:4) note the studies they reviewed “suggest that where nutrient loading is a problem, burning slash within the buffer is likely to increase the loading and the problem”. These studies on slash burning indicate buffer zones likely also reduce nutrient spikes from upland prescribed burning. Water chemistry samples taken on North Fork of North Creek in October 2010 showed a considerable spike in phosphorus after the Oldroyd burn, despite the fact that that the sample was not timed in order to hit expected peak levels (Whelan 2003). This could indicate the prescribed burn treatments and wildfires could lead to large nutrient pulses moving down streams. These would likely be of small consequence in stream systems, but could be important if draining into the fish supporting water reservoirs on Monroe Mountain, which are already nutrient laden.   A variation of this proposal is to thin smaller conifers up to an 8 inch dbh size, leaving the larger trees. In areas where conifer invasion was just starting this could increase habitat diversity. In areas where conifer invasion is well established, it may be much less effective due to leaving seed sources in the stand. It would have similar or even less effects than above.  Under the No Action Alternative there would be no mechanical vegetative or prescribed fire treatments, so no direct adverse effects would be expected to the streams aquatic macroinvertebrates. Potential indirect effects would come from natural succession as the areas further move to late seral communities with secondary effects to watershed health and increasing risks of catastrophic wildfire. potentially delivered to the streams. These high rates of sediment could cover gravels and may adversely affect localized populations or viability of aquatic macroinvertebrates.   The activities associated with this project are relatively low risk for aquatic invasive species (AIS) transfer. The design feature of following Regional Operational and Technical guidelines for AIS (USFS R4 2014a and 2014b) would thus provide adequate protection.   Specific Effect Predictions:  Solt (2015) prepared the hydrological / watershed report for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. Solt (2015) provides background information on the proposed action, design features, and background information on Monroe Mountain, much of which was incorporated into this report. He also provides information on aquatic resources (streams and lakes), riparian areas, groundwater, and water quality. As noted in Solt (2015), 2 Monroe Mountain water bodies are on the 2010 approved 303d list – Manning Meadow Reservoir (dissolved oxygen and total phosphorous for Cold Water Aquatic Use) and lower Box Creek Reservoir (pH for Cold Water Aquatic Use). Solt (2015) has a good summary of soils and erosion processes (stream and upland) that this report tiers to for its effect analysis.  It is important to note that due to the many assumptions and uncertainties inherent in models absolute numbers should be treated with caution. Predicted model results may be plus/minus 50% of true values and erosion rates are highly variable. Erosion after fires can range from .4 to 2.6 tons/acre/year from prescribed fires up to 9 to 49 tons/acre/year after wildfires. Erosion rates and sedimentation normally decline for several years until returning to normal background rates. Solt (2015) notes several drainages of concern given the proposed action. Summarizing from Solt (2015) but in the HUC order discussed in this document they are:  Dry Canyon is debris flow prone (values at risk below Forest) and should likely be treated over multiple entries.  Water Creek – potential to affect downstream diversions and irrigation water and add sediment to Big Lake.  Greenwich Creek – somewhat less concern but still over >15% treatment and a diversion potentially at risk. Box Creek – Cumulative effects concern with areas proposed for treatment added to past treatments. “Cumulative effects wise this should be treated with care and potential over multiple entries.”  Solt (2015) notes that the project design features will aid in the trapping of sediment and nutrients (see buffer discussion above) and are a factor in the relatively low probability of sediment reaching the stream from mechanical treatments and low intensity fire in his WEPP modeling.  Solt (2015) notes some concerns from overlap of currently approved but not yet implemented work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain/North Clover projects. Since acreage figures for these projects by HUC were not provided in GIS data for the fisheries analysis, it is likely that the ERA modeling conducted below understates impacts to Big Lake, Koosharem Creek, and Box Creek. It is difficult to predict effects for 2 potential projects in the  With regard to design features Solt (2015) writes “Riparian buffers, Mitigation Measures, BMPs will not likely protect all riparian functions during vegetation treatments. However, they will be aid in the protection of riparian areas and maintaining water quality.” Solt (2015) describes that local impacts “might be dramatic” but at the “landscape level are not expected to lead to drastic loss of riparian vegetation or function”. This is consistent with the fisheries biologist view that design features and BMPs minimize impacts but do not fully offset them. Interpreted by this author, Solt (2015) implies that fairly large reach scale impacts are likely, while at the overall drainage level and across the mountain range, watershed function will only slightly or moderately be affected. This should maintain large scale resources like fish populations in long streams, but could be important to key localized aquatic assets like important boreal toad breeding sites and hibernacula, trout broodstocks, and high value recreational lake fisheries.  Table 9(next page): Hydrological disturbance rating developed from Solt (2015). Note – alternatives ranked 1-5 with 1 being least impacts, 5 greatest. Solt (2015) did not include the No Action alternative in his table; it was added to Table 9 and Tables K-1 and K-2 for the synthesis for consistency with other tables in this report. HUC Alt 3    1 3 4 5 2  Manning Cr – Upper 1 3 4 5 2  MC – Barney Lake 1  In contrast, a prescribed fire on Shingle Creek in 2002 burned about . mile of stream bottom in a high intensity burn resulting in high soil burn severities in the riparian area. Fish were absent from the burned area for several weeks following the fire, and monitoring found about 80% fewer fish in the burned area for 2 years following the fire. (unpublished data in FNF SO files). Fish numbers returned to near normal levels 5 years following the burn, but a heavy infestation of cheatgrass invaded upper streambanks and stream terraces, likely increasing future fire risk to the stream and sediment erosion from upper banks into the stream.  Cottonwood Creek, also on the East Fork of the Sevier River, had 6% high severity, 39% moderate severity, and 5% low severity burn within its sub-watershed. Trout were also extirpated in this watershed.  Indian Creek had 38% burned at moderate to high severity but a large part of the upper watershed was moderate severity night underburns (human ignitions) in stands with an aspen component that actively sprouted, lessening fire effects. Areas burned late in the season (drier conditions) in the lower watersheds were more severely burned. Thus fish survival was fairly good in the upper watershed with some habitat effects, while fish in the lower watershed were extirpated from events from tributary drainages, even as late as 2013 (Fishlake N.F. file data).  much of Shingle Creek in August 2014 using large trackhoes. Just weeks after completion of this work, the 2014 floods rearranged much of the wood placed into a series of small debris jams.  Fish Creek was burned at 47% moderate to high severity, with the tributaries Picnic, Line, and Trail Creek burned at even higher percentages. Upper Picnic Creek was not affected by the Twitchell Canyon fire, however, and East Fork of Fish Creek had a lower burned area percentage and large areas of low to moderate fire severities. Fish survived in both of these headwater areas. Downstream burned areas have had extensive habitat damage from gravel bedload transport filling habitat features, but some fish have been found in sampling due to small numbers of fish moving in from unburned reaches (Hadley 2012).  These fires have been summarized in Table 10, below. The fires which led to trout populations being lost occurred in dry or hot summer and fall months (June through September excluding the wet monsoon season), and had at least 30% of the watershed burned OR were associated with debris flow prone sub-watersheds (see below). The streams in the table below have been arranged by increasing percentage of the watershed burned in moderate to high severity to show the generally increasing progression of effects to aquatics as fire percentage increases.  Photos 20 and 21: L – Fishlake NF hydrological personnel show magnitude of the August 2011 flood in lower North Fork of North Creek from mark on far bank, over the height of the hand raised at stream edge to the toe of the person in the foreground. Flood was estimated at 500 cfs and killed all fish in these stream reaches. R – Middle Shingle Creek after the August 2011 flood. All traces of riparian vegetation were removed by the flood. Only 9 trout survived this flood and all were on mainstem Clear Creek just above the Shingle Creek confluence. Design features incorporated into this project to limit 6th field HUC treatments to 15% of the area at one time will prevent floods of this magnitude, but there still could be some impacts from high percentage treatments at the 7th field HUC level.   Photos 22 and 23 (next page): L- The August 2011 flood out of Shingle Creek was large enough to totally destroy this concrete block fish barrier located just below the confluence with upper Clear Creek. One concrete block (2x2x4 foot) was found over 500 feet downstream. R - Turbid floods sufficient to kill trout are still occurring 4 years post-fire in 2014. This photo shows a late summer 2014 flood on upper Clear Creek below the confluence with Shingle Creek, at a site where a second fish barrier damaged by previous flooding was just removed. The flood can be seen going over a cross-vane constructed at the former barrier location. [Also see Photo 13 for less severe but long-term chronic impacts to water clarity on middle Clear Creek below Fish and Shingle Creeks.]   Table 10: Fire Effects to Fisheries – S. Utah 2000-2014 (excludes Pine Valley Mountains) Table 10 shows the percentage burned at the HUC-6 level, although the pour point used for the table might be slightly modified from the HUC boundary to the point of diversion or lower extent of the fish population. Percentage burn is for the modified boundary. Stream Total Watershed % M-H Severity Burned Fish Population Effects Channel Effects Fire/Year Shingle Creek 41% Extirpated2 Severe – with new major channel changing events even 4 years post-fire Twitchell/2010 Cottonwood Creek 45% Extirpated Major Sanford/2002 Fish Creek avg. (inc. Tributaries) 47% Extirpated except in less burned East Fork headwaters Table 11: Proposed Treatment Percentages by Subwatershed summarized from Table 8.*  Fire % / Mechanical % / Total % HUC NoAct Alt 2 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper Mod6 0 / 10 / 10 14 / 13 / 27 Manning Cr – Upper 15 / 2 / 17 14 / 9 / 23 12 / 8 /20 MC – Barney Lake 7 43 / 0 / 43 26 / 29 / 54 15 / 47 / 62 7 0 / 0 / 0 14 / 16 / 30 2 / 36 / 38 MC – HUC 6 combined 0 / 0 / 0 16/2/18 14/11/25 12/10/21 Dry Can – Hunts Lk 8 29 / 0 / 29 29 / 0 / 29 29 / 0 / 29 Monroe Creek Mod6 - 0 / 0 / 0 23 / 4 / 27 22 / 10 / 32 18 / 19 / 37 18 / 13 / 31 MonroeCr- Magleby 7 0 / 0 / 0 15 / 5 / 20 6 / 20 / 26 2 / 27 / 29 6 / 20 / 26 MonroeCrcombined Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 23/4/27 21/10/32 17/19/36 17/14/31 Thompson Creek 6 0 / 0 / 0 Not used due to HUC configuration TC-Annabella Res 7 0 / 0 / 0 40 / 5 / 45 29 / 23 / 52 11 / 54 / 65 29 / 24 / 52 Water Creek 6 0 / 0 / 0 Not used due to HUC configuration WC – Big Lake 7 0 / 0 / 0 13 / 15 / 28 10 / 22 / 32 8 / 25 / 33 2 / 34 / 36 Koosharem Creek Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 9 / 1 / 11 9 / 2 / 11 8 / 6 / 15 9 / 1 / 10 Greenwich Creek Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 1 / 14 / 15 1 / 15 / 16 1 / 16 / 17 1 / 14 / 15 Box Cr ab. Res.** 7 0 / 0 / 0 6 / 8 / 15 6 / 9 / 15 6 / 9 / 15 6 / 9 / 14 Box Cr below Res. Mod6 - 0 / 0 / 0 2 / 16 / 19 0 / 19 / 19 1 / 18 / 19 Mod6 4/13/17 4/15/19 3/14/17 **Large areas already burned and treated. See ERA modeling and cumulative effects section for cumulative watershed impacts. The above description of effects was based only on burned areas. The proposed project includes large areas of both burning and mechanical treatments. For this portion of the analysis, they were considered equivalent with the understanding that the predicted effects would be high, since some of the mechanical treatments are relatively low effect and some areas would have low severity fire. [Since type of mechanical treatments were not mapped at the HUC scale, a more detailed analysis breaking mechanical treatments out by area could not be done]. Again, it is important to understand that not all of the treatment area would be detrimentally disturbed and areas of minimal soil disturbance and low severity fire would reduce the area contributing to watershed effects. The numbers in Table 11 and the summary in Appendix K-1 do show subwatersheds with high treatment levels that warrant caution, however, and provide relative rankings for evaluation.  Empirical fire data effects have not been well looked at in southern Utah for 7th field HUCs, although they have been documented to be the source of damaging debris flows in steeper basins, which are well documented in two Cannon et al. papers (2010, 2003) and Cannon and DeGraff (2009) [see debris flow section next]. Treatment at this level is complicated by a couple of factors. The smaller size makes it more efficient and economical to treat a larger percentage of the subwatershed in one entry. Due to topography and continuous fuels, it is often difficult to limit fire treatments to only a certain percentage of the subwatershed. It is not well established what an appropriate treatment level for 7th field HUCs are, generally speaking, for southern Utah. Discussion with professional hydrologists indicate that it is a scaling problem, however, and that if a treatment of a certain percentage is problematic at the 6th field level, i.e. 30%, than it is also likely to generally be an issue at that same percentage in the smaller 7th field subwatersheds. The regional Standard and Guideline for soils (USDA Forest Service 2011) is for an “activity area” so it could certainly apply at a 7th field HUC level.  The IRE stream surveys conducted provided streambank stability ratings, which can be adjusted for channel type. This streambank stability level provides an idea of the resilience of the stream to moderate sized watershed events. Petty’s (2004) Pfankuch data shows that Manning Creek and its tributaries are generally in good condition, which will help lessen effects of project work to this drainage. The Manning Creek drainage has a moderate level of treatments proposed (17- 23% or 18-25% when combined with Barney Lake and Manning Reservoir), which is in between levels observed where reach scale impacts occur and populations are typically lost. The 6th field design feature would limit treatments at one time to 15% of the HUC. This would indicate that moderate-term population scale impacts could occur at the HUC6 scale. Manning Reservoir’s subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 21-38%, which due to topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but which are indicative of likely increases in sedimentation to the broodstock reservoir. Barney Lake’s subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 43-62%. Again, topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but these very high treatment percentages are indicative of likely major increases in sedimentation to the reservoir.  Monroe Creek drainage has high levels of treatments proposed (27- 37% or 27-36% when combined). There is no IRE data on this stream on stream stability to give potential to buffer impacts. The 6th field design feature would limit treatments at one time to 15% of the HUC. This would indicate that moderate-term population scale impacts could occur at the HUC6 scale. [Many of the steeper subwatersheds that are planned for fire treatment are debris flow prone and could have major effects below their confluences - see next section].  The Annabelle Reservoir 7th field subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 45-65%. Again, topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but these very high treatment percentages are indicative of likely major increases in sedimentation to the reservoirs.  Big Lake’s 7th field subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 28-36%. Again, topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but these high treatment percentages are indicative of likely increases in sedimentation to the reservoir. These predictions are potentially low due to interaction with approved but not yet carried out treatments in this subwatershed.  On Koosharem Creek proposed treatments are generally in the range where reach scale effects have been seen (<15% treatment area). Petty’s (2006b) Pfankuch data showed Koosharem Creek to be mostly in good condition, further limiting impacts. While Koosharem Creek impacts would likely be mostly localized and short-term, these predictions are potentially low due to interaction with approved but not yet carried out treatments in this subwatershed.  On Greenwich Creek proposed treatments are generally just over the level where reach scale effects have been seen (<15% treatment area). Petty (2006b) however, found that a large percentage of Greenwich Creek is in poor condition, which will exacerbate impacts to this watershed. The stream is well dispersed across the landscape in several tributary drainages. Thus impacts in this watershed will most likely be at the reach scale but moderate-term in duration.  On Box Creek proposed treatments are generally just over the range where reach scale effects have been seen (17-19% combined HUC). Petty’s (2006a) Pfankuch data showed Box Creek at its upper tributaries to be a mix of good (54%), fair (24%) and poor (22%) condition, which reduces its ability to buffer impacts. Predictions based on the above percentages are potentially low due to interaction with approved but not yet carried out treatments in this subwatershed. Therefore, overall, Box Creek impacts will likely be moderate-term extensive reach scale or smaller population scale impacts at the HUC6 scale.  A design feature was added between the Draft and Final EIS that limits treatments in the Manning Reservoir, Barney Lake, Annabella Reservoir, and Big Lake subwatersheds to 20% at one time or at a level that keeps a current ERA model run at or below the TOC of 10. This will lessen the concerns expressed above for these 4 subwatersheds.  Debris Flow Risk  In areas of steep stream gradient and hill slopes, debris torrents from debris flow prone subwatersheds represent an additional concern for fisheries. After reviewing Cannon et al. (2003) Dale Deiter, the previous Fishlake N.F. Forest Hydrologist, observed that characteristics of many Forest sub-watersheds make them highly prone to debris flow events given disturbances. Burning over 40% of these small, steep face side drainages at a moderate or higher intensity can place the treated area at high risk for a debris flow event. These risks were confirmed after the Devils Den wildfire in 2006, which burned the majority (mostly moderate to high severities) of two debris flow prone tributaries to Oak Creek: Devils Den and Limekiln Canyon. Storm events two months following the fire caused severe flooding and borderline debris flows out of these canyons, effectively extirpating the recreational fishery despite the fact that only a small percent of the total watershed was burned (see Table 10 for summary information). Thus, even small ephemeral tributaries can be of concern if they connect near the head of a trout population.  Two important considerations of debris flows are that they can cause considerable damage downstream of the fire boundary and that relatively small or common storms can trigger them (Cannon and DeGraff 2009). Western weather patterns since the mid-1980s have trended toward reduced snowfall, warmer spring seasons, earlier snowpack melt, and longer drier summers which have altered fire regimes to more frequent, longer lasting large fires that pose greater debris flow risks (Cannon and DeGraff 2009).  The hydrological report (Solt 2015) looked at ten partial HUC6 level watersheds using the Cannon et al. (2003) model and found that 8 of the 10 are debris flow prone. If greater than 50% of these drainages were burned at moderate severity they would all be prone to debris flows under the right precipitation events (Solt 2015). Discussed in the same order as other sections of the report, these drainages were Dry Creek, Manning Creek, Dry Canyon (limited aquatic resources), Monroe Creek, Thompson Basin (most aquatic resources in very upper end), Koosharem Creek, and Greenwich Creek. The two basins not debris flow prone – South and North Fork of Box Creek- were actually close to thresholds and could produce debris flows under the right conditions.  Potential for debris flows actually decreases as the watershed size looked at increases. These are generally issues with small steep subwatersheds at the HUC7 or HUC8 level. Floods from these small subwatersheds can have major effects downstream throughout a HUC6 drainage, however, if they occur near the headwaters (see above discussion on Oak Creek and Hadley et al. 2011b). Given this, the Forest fisheries biologist ran the Cannon 2003 model on several HUC7 and HUC8 tributary subwatersheds to Monroe Creek. All were debris flow prone according to the 2003 model.  This does not necessarily mean that treatment will result in a debris flow. It is highly dependent on the area treated, the soil burn severity, and precipitation received by the subwatershed after the fire. At the 7th and 8th field level this can be challenging for implementers, as the same factors that make the drainage debris flow prone make it difficult to control fire. I.e., these are frequently natural “chimneys” and their steepness and rugged nature often precludes work that could break up fuels to allow treatment of only part of the drainage at a time. Given the knowledge and concern, it is likely that implementers will be careful and make choices that result in treatments that have lower probabilities of creating debris flows. What can be said, however, is that there are no design features currently in place to require these factors be considered at the 7th or 8th field level.  Since no detailed GIS analysis was conducted using later Cannon developed models by HUC, there are no ranking tables for this measure. This section serves as information to the deciding official and readers that debris flow prone subwatersheds are common in the project area, and with sufficient treatment levels, debris flows would be likely. The new models (Cannon et al. 2010 and Cannon and DeGraff 2009) factor in soil characteristics along with basin geography. With these new models, specific subwatersheds could be modeled; with an assumed rainfall intensity modeling could look at changes in area treated to potentially identify thresholds where debris flows would become much more likely. It is highly recommended that this modeling be conducted before treatments in any subwaterhseds containing, or upstream of, high value aquatic resources and human property. A recommended implementation action was added at the end of the report to run newer Cannon debris flow prediction models (Cannon et al. 2010 Models A, B, or C depending on what soil information is available or Cannon and DeGraff. 2009: p186 - equations 9.6 and 9.7) for each debris flow prone HUC7 or HUC8 identified as being debris flow prone using the Cannon et al. (2003) model prior to actual implementation to determine if potential threshold points can be identified. These could help determine the appropriate sized treatment area to achieve desired results while greatly lessening the probability of severe downstream consequences.  Soil Suitability / Mass Wasting Risk  Mass wasting and other soil erosion processes, such as areas prone to slope failure or other high volume movements and hydrophobic conditions after fire are important to aquatic resources, as they have potential to introduce large volumes of sediment into stream channels where they can have major indirect effects to aquatic biota. Mike Smith, former Fishlake N.F. Soil Scientist, prepared maps showing soil suitability for various treatments by typical calendar dates (Fishlake N.F. file data). These maps help identify areas that may respond poorly to prescribed burning. In the experience of the Forest fisheries biologist, the volcanic derived soils of Monroe are not likely as serious a concern for mass wasting and severe erosion as the shale derived soils in the Salina Creek drainage. The hydrological report notes that “Mass wasting is not a dominant process in the Project Area. However, rock fall, shallow landslides, deep-seated landslides, and debris flows may be potential hazards…in the hill and mountain portions of the Project Area… …Special methods and erosion control best management practices may be needed to prevent or limit soil loss in the hill and mountain areas” (Solt 2015: p25). This section serves as information to the deciding official and readers that soil wasting processes are not considered highly likely events that would affect aquatic biota, but could occur. Erosion events and processes, particularly rill, sheet, and gully erosion could occur on steep slopes, some of which, based on the Smith soil maps, would be unsuitable for burning under some conditions. It is recommended that these soil maps be consulted when planning individual burn treatments, but overall general soils concerns are considered secondary to debris flow risk.   Equivalent Roaded Area Analysis  Analysis of a landscape scale restoration projects is complex, as it covers multiple watersheds and occurs alongside many past and ongoing land management actions. Cumulative effects are a major concern. In an attempt to incorporate these past impacts and actions – wildfires, prescribed fires, managed wildfires, timber sales, Dixie harrow treatments – and ongoing activities - particularly grazing and motorized transport – Equivalent Roaded Area modeling was used. The cumulative effects area of delineated subwatersheds (HUC6 and HUC7) was used as the base area. GIS figures were developed for the year of occurrence and acres of affected habitat within each subwatershed. GIS was also used to develop figures for road miles (including proposed temporary road for each action alternative), estimated grazed upland and riparian acres (developed by overlaying the stream layer, estimated grazed areas, and HUC boundaries).  The figures for acres of the various types of proposed mechanical treatment by HUC have not been calculated, so for this and other analysis methods an assumption had to be made to treat all mechanical treatments as harvest for modeling purposes. This likely overstates the effects of the proposed vegetation treatments. In the smaller 7th and 8th field HUCs where harvest levels are of most concern to aquatic resources (Barney, Manning, Annabella Reservoir, and Big Lake) the majority of mechanical treatments are likely timber harvest (thinning to BA 90), so modeling results in these HUCs is likely correct.  Photos 24 and 25: ERA analysis includes the impacts to watershed function of past activities such as (L) the White Ledges aspen clearcut in the Manning drainage (2000 photo) and ongoing activities such as (R) riparian livestock grazing in this Greenwich Creek tributary (2002 photo) and roads. The White ledges aspen clearcut was an aspen restoration treatment that failed, in part due to excessive livestock and wild ungulate browsing. The current Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project has several additional measures – fencing of treatment areas in the Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake areas (see Figure 4), aspen browse thresholds and response options, and focused efforts on conifer removal with only incidental aspen removal – which will increase the likelihood of successful aspen restoration.    In all, 90 Excel spreadsheet sheets were used to model 13 delineated subwatersheds at the modified 6th field HUC (often reduced in area to a pour point at major diversion, fish population end, or mouth of canyon), or smaller 7th or 8th field HUC containing important lakes and reservoirs. Two 6th field HUCs that were not modified and included large areas of low elevation land off Forest were not modeled. In three modified 6th field HUCS where smaller subwatersheds had been split out, the subwatersheds were also combined to show figures for the entire modified HUC6. Appendix H has additional information on the methods used and assumptions made for this modeling exercise. Eighty spreadsheet sheets are summarized into Table H-4 below that ranks the No Action and action alternatives for each of the modeled HUCs.  Table H-4: ERA Percentage by Sub-watersheds by Alternative HUC Name HUCtype TOC MC – HUC 6 combined Mod6 10 9.5 10.9 8 12.5 12.5 Mod6- 1.1 8.9 10.6 12.6 10.7 MonroeCr- Magleby 7 10 .2 3715 9.3 1788 11.0 Box Cr (combined) 2953 Alt 4 13.6 12.1 11.2 *Proposed treatment is close to the 15% level already. Decline by 2nd treatment is due to recovery over the 5 years assumed between treatments.  Applying the 15% design feature at the HUC6 level reduces the initial treatment ERA to below TOC in the three west Monroe HUCs. The ERA level rises considerably for the 2nd treatment in Dry Creek but remains below the suggested TOC (found in Table H-4) due to the higher TOC for this subwatershed. In 2nd treatment ERA also remains below TOC for the Monroe subwatershed. In the Manning Creek subwatershed, however, ERA rises above slightly above TOC. In the Koosharem and Greenwich subwatersheds, applying the 15% design feature only slightly reduces ERA, as the proposed treatment level was already near 15%. By the time the small amount of remaining acres were treated in the 2nd entry, modeled ERA declines further due to recovery from past treatments. In Box Creek the design feature reduces total ERA slightly to just above TOC for the initial treatment and just below TOC for the 2nd entry, due to the large area of existing and proposed disturbance.  As described in greater detail in Appendix H, actual levels of impacts that occur during implementation are likely to be somewhat lower (due to implementation being spread over time, achieving design objectives of low to moderate fire severities, and including low fire severities as part of the 60% treatment area) if the project is implemented as designed. In some cases impacts could be moderately lower than modeled. While the modeled results are likely the upper end of what could occur, since all factors were consistent between alternatives, the relative ranking of the alternatives can be used to help differentiate between them for decision making purposes. Additional design features were added between the DEIS and FEIS that further protect aquatic resources. One was to repeat the ERA modeling just prior to beginning work in a HUC6 subwatershed to incorporate the implementation of these previously approved projects and recovery periods for all past work done in the HUC prior to starting implementation of this project. In addition, use of more accurate figures for the area of planned mechanical treatments by type can be incorporated, which will likely reduced the level of impacts calculated for mechanical treatments from the level of this modeling effort. If the ERA modeling still indicates concerns, the design feature states “multiple entries would occur to reduce cumulative effects to the subwatershed”. At the smaller 7th and 8th field, ERA modeling shows much higher figures due to cumulative disturbance in some subwatersheds. Calculated ERA levels ranged from a low of 7.8 up to a high of 22.3, which could be considered very high (and well above TOC) based the Haraden (2013) calculated ERA for Shingle Creek and observed effects to fisheries there. For Barney Lake the ERA was very high for Alternatives 3, 4, and 5; for Manning Reservoir the ERA was moderately high for Alternative 3, 4 and 5, for TC-Annabelle Reservoir the ERA was very high for Alternative 4, for WC-Big Lake the ERA was moderately high for Alternatives 3, 4 and 5, and for Box Creek above Reservoirs moderately high for Alternatives 2-5.  Visual/Spatial Review of Action Alternative Maps by HUC  HUC Alt 2 Alt 5 Mod6 Extensive burning in watershed but mostly below BT habitat. Addition of much more timber harvest in upper watershed in. BT habitat. Similar to alternative 2 but with some middle elevation areas switched from prescribed burning to mechanical harvest. Manning Cr – Upper Mod6 - No treatments Considerable portion of HUC treated. Prescribed fire proposed along most of fish bearing stream. Similar to alternative 2 w/ additional mechanical harvest between Collins Creek and Barney Cr. Similar to alternative 3 w/almost all of upper HUC now w mech. treatment. Considerable risk for BT and BCT resources. Similar to alternative 2 but with some upper elevation areas switched from prescribed burning to mechanical harvest. MC – Barney Lake 7 No treatments Very high % of HUC above reservoir w/ prescribed burning. High risk to reservoir, BT, high value fishery. Similar to alternative 2 but w about 1/2 of treatment switched to harvest. High risk to reservoir, BT, high value fishery. Mod6 - Similar to alternative 2 but with majority of headwater BT habitat treated, mostly mechanical harvest. No treatments Similar area treated as others but almost all mechanical vegetation treatment. MonroeCrcombined      Thompson Creek 6 No treatments Considerable area of headwaters treated w/ prescribed fire, including majority of BT habitat. Similar to alternative 2. Similar area treated as other alternatives, but w eastern edge of HUC mechanical vegetation treatment. Similar to alternative 2. TC-Annabella Res 7 No treatments Nearly half the basin above reservoir and nearly half BT habitat proposed for treatment by fire. Mod-high risk to BT, fishery reservoir. Moderate amount of BT habitat and upper streamside zone treated. Box Cr above Res. Small to mod amount of HUC treated due to extensive past fire/treatments. Majority fire with some mechanical vegetation treatments. Small to moderate amount of BT habitat and upper streamside zone treated. Similar to alternative 2. Mod6 - Similar to alternative 2 with slightly more mechanical treatment. Mod6           PARC No Action Alt 4   P1 Ensure availability and protection of all essential and critical habitat types No impact Design features include measures for this HMG P2 UCP3.2. 1 Maintain un-fragmented habitat. Minimize activities in corridors - PARC - 50-330 feet buffer on each side of streams No impact P26 No impact P27 Small perennial seeps need better mapping to ensure they are protected. Currently this is identified for the implementation phase. Maintain seasonal wetlands by retaining native vegetation around them – PARC 540-900 feet (100- 275m)  P30 In timber management areas, buffer wetlands. Leave some surrounding upland areas undisturbed No impact Design features include measures for this HMG UCP3.8. 1 Protect habitats in forest stands adjacent to and within 2.5 miles (4km) of breeding sites No change from current conditions Not consistent P31 UCP3.8. 2 When feasible harvest timber during amphibian inactive seasons No change from current conditions Not fully consistent. Weather patterns and road access makes application of this more difficult. Instead RHCA design features help protect toads. P32 Schedule log-hauling adjacent to amphibian habitat in dry months or fall/winter No change from current conditions Not fully consistent. Main roads already open to all traffic. Temporary roads in RHCAs would not be used until after 10/1, however, unless surveys indicated use not likely to be a problem. P33 impacts in Water Creek and Big Lake subwatersheds, although some temporary roads were relocated slightly to reduce areas of concern. No impact UCP3.7. 1 Not fully consistent. Some impacts in Water Creek and Big Lake subwatersheds, although some temporary roads were relocated slightly to reduce areas of concern. UCP3.7. 2 No impact Temporary roads in Water Creek and Big Lake subwatersheds generally routed to avoid close distance to known breeding sites. Not consistent in Barney Reservoir subwatershed.  Livestock Management   Recreation Management   Fisheries Management   Bull (2006) found boreal toads in her study to be primarily terrestrial (81%) with the majority of terrestrial locations (81%) associated with refugia (in decreasing order of use) such as rocks, burrows, logs, depressions, and stumps/root wads. In terms of habitat use, Bull (2006) found toads to use habitat in direct proportion of its occurrence in her study area in Oregon, which included wildfire burned habitat and timber harvests. Toads preferred more open habitat and south facing slopes, generally with more rocks, water, and forbs than occurred in random comparison plots (Bull 2006).  Bull (2006) found hibernacula at five sites in Oregon to be in rodent burrows, under large rocks, logs, root wads, and banks of streams and rivers, with only 27% associated (<1m) with water. Browne and Paszkowski (2010) radio-tracked boreal toads to hibernacula in three study sites in Canada, finding toads using peat hummocks, red squirrel middens, cavities under spruce trees, root tunnels, natural crevices, and abandoned beaver lodges. In two of the three areas, the majority of toads hibernated in [black] spruce-dominated tree stands. In the 2003-2004 radio tracking study on Monroe Mountain determining hibernacula location was not a primary goal (we attempted to remove radios before toads moved into hibernacula so that toads would not carry the radios into inaccessible areas before the batteries died) but enough areas of use were found in late season to find that small perennial and unmapped seeps (i.e. not on the Forest GIS data layers) that upwelled from root chambers under spruce/fir appeared to be important for hibernacula (Photos 28 and 29). Other areas identified as hibernacula in the Monroe study were burrows and root chambers under riparian and even transitional zone shrubs (Photo 27) and old beaver dams. Several toads would often be found together in these situations, which is similar to the finding by Browne and Paszkowski (2010) that 68% of the hibernacula in their study were communal. This would increase the effect to the local population if a hibernacula was impacted by management activities.  Bull (2006) did voice concern, however, that fuel reduction treatments that reduce course woody debris, clearcutting, and other harvest activities may limit toad movements and habitat use (by removing predation/thermal/moisture refugia), affect food availability (ants), and affect squirrels (that create burrows used by toads) noting additional research was needed. Guscio et al. (2008) also noted that more information was needed on the effects of direct habitat treatments, including timber harvest and fuel reductions.   This author developed the study proposal and worked with seasonal employees in implementing the 2003-2004 Monroe Mountain boreal toad habitat use study in response to the earlier Monroe Mountain aspen restoration EIS that was further analyzed and described by Goates et al. (2007) and Goates (2006). Monroe Mountain has considerable open habitat available, so open habitat is not likely a limiting factor as it appears to be for boreal toads in the Northern Rocky Mountain areas. Toads on Monroe used a variety of habitat types, mostly along or near water. At times during the summer Monroe Mountain can be quite dry and warm given its lower mountainous elevation and southern Utah location. It is the professional opinion of this writer given his experience in working on this study and the above factors that 1) most within-drainage boreal toad movement during summer likely occurs along the streams within the drainage, and 2) boreal toad response to habitat projects would likely be similar to Bull’s (2006) findings that burned habitats are used by toads in about the same ratio as its availability in the mid to long-term. UDWR and used for general mapped stream drainages for this project. Finally, ensuring all unmapped streams and seeps have at least a 100 foot (30.5) meter buffer incorporates the lessons learned from Goates et al. (2007) for buffering these unmapped waterways. While design features have been incorporated into the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to reduce the impact of treating boreal toad habitat, one can infer from the above information that both vegetation treatments and the lack of treatments in boreal toad habitat can have positive or negative effects to habitat suitability and individual toads depending on scale, timing, and location. Logically, it was felt that no treatment of boreal toad habitat could be negative, in having a progression towards domination of late seral habitat, too much conifer/woody cover, and increased fire risk (of particular concern bring the secondary detrimental effects of a large high severity fire to riparian, stream, and lake habitats). While treatment of some habitat could entail short-term risks to individual toads, it would reduce fire risk and ensure a variety of habitats and stand ages. Treatment of extensive areas could result in larger impacts to individuals and toad burrows/habitats due to much more physical disturbance within boreal toad habitat, however. These large areas of disturbance could result in loss of large wood and other features across large areas that are associated with hiding/thermal/moisture refugia, and hibernacula (which are often associated with spruce trees) on Monroe Mountain. They could also have effects to squirrels and other small mammals that affect toad habitat quality and toad food supplies.  Treatment disturbance was particularly high for the Barney Lake HUC in alternatives 4 and 5, and the Thompson Creek HUC in alternative 4. Treatment disturbance was very high for Barney Lake in alternatives 2 and 3, the Thompson Creek HUC in alternatives 2, 3, and 5 and Anabella Reservoir HUC in alternative 4. These high levels noted in this paragraph are likely to have much higher short-term impacts to boreal toads, with also a greater risk of creating unforeseen habitat impacts in the moderate term. 27 :  H abitats within the mapp ed key boreal toad habitat. L -  Kevin Wheeler, UDWR surveys for boreal toads along South Fork of Box Creek, showing diverse mix of habitats  –  herbacious riparian, willows, sagebrush, aspen, and conifer . Note that this photo shows considerable already existing area s  of open habitat, such as that found to be favored by boreal toads in some studies. pr oposed for treatments. R -   Unusual hibernacula used in North Fork of Box Creek in a burrow system under a shrub above the riparian zone. Note aspen in background.  The shrub was located in a gentle swale 51 – 12.1% 55 – 13.1% 3,409 116 – 16.6% 122/5 124 – 17.7% Koosharem Creek 3,715 475 7/17 24 – 5.1% 7/20 27 – 5.7% 43/18 61 – 12.8% 3/20 23 – 4.8% Greenwich Creek 11,922 1,322 HUC Name Road Miles in BT Habitat Temp Road Miles in BT Habitat Alternative with Temp Roads 9,510 .51 (.36) 5.62/5.62 0%  Manning Cr – Upper 14,855 1,044 (1.631) 2.52 (1.55) .64 (.39) 0 1.94/1.94 0% 4 MC – BarneyLake 283 174 (.272) .12 (.44) .61 (2.24) .68 (2.5) 2.68/5.18 Alternative Synthesis This analysis used 7 methods to help quantify the potential impacts of the no action alternative relative to the 4 action alternatives to aquatic resources. These methods were: tiering to the hydrological/soils report, watershed treatment area percentage, equivalent roaded area, spatial review with aquatic biologist professional opinion, amphibian management guideline consistency, key boreal toad habitat proposed for treatment, and key boreal toad habitat proposed road increases. Each of these methods tells a slightly different story as effects vary by alternative, area, and the resource of concern (stream fishery, lake water quality, boreal toad viability, etc.). To help assimilate each of these analysis methods to a common frame of reference a synthesis table was developed (see Appendix K).  HUC Name Alt 3 247 335 284 Overall Ranking 1 2 4 5 3 8 27 MonroeCr- Magleby 17 17 MonroeCrcombined Mod6      Thompson Creek 6 7   It is often stated that managed fire is generally cooler and less destructive than wildfire. This may be true in the case of many fires looked at individually. Coming at it from the side of conservation biology of sensitive native aquatic fish and the loss or near loss of remnant populations and genetic diversity, however, it is not necessarily true. Over the last 20 years in southern Utah, there have been 3 large fire events that have had major consequences to native Bonneville cutthroat trout populations. Remnant stocks and unique genes would have been lost (and may yet still be lost for one) if it were not for the dedicated actions of fisheries professionals from multiple agencies. These three major fires were a wildfire actively suppressed from its ignition onwards, a prescribed fire that escaped prescription, and a managed wildfire allowed to burn for “resource benefits”. Thus the empirical data from southern Utah over the last 2 decades show that wildfire, prescribed fire, and managed fire have all had about equal risk to important and irreplaceable native fish stocks.    General discussion for All Species  Potential indirect effects would come from natural succession as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This change in vegetation communities could potentially affect fire risk, fire behavior, fire severity and recovery times, and watershed function.   Indirect Effects of the Action Alternatives (Broken Out by Species/MIS)  . The Manning Creek watershed contains the only BCT core conservation population lake habitat on the Forest. Manning Meadow Reservoir provides a high quality sport fishery after the lake is opened for fishing following broodstock operations. Barney Lake, where BCT co-occur with sterile hybrid tiger trout, provides a high quality fishery. . A considerable portion of the Manning Creek drainage is planned for treatment under all action alternatives. ii. The Forest does not have experience at modeling at the 7th field HUC level, but communication with professional hydrologists indicate reasons for concern at high treatment percentages at the 7th field level. upper reservoirs. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir ERA ranged from 10.8- 16.7 for the action alternatives. Above Barney Lake ERA ranged from 12.5-22.3 for the action alternative. When all areas are considered together, the ERA ranged from 9.5-12.0. 1. Calculated ERAs for North Fork of North Creek and Indian Creek were 9 and 10.3 (Haraden 2013). These fish populations suffered population scale declines. The following factors and project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling and make it likely that while population scale effects could occur, they would not likely be at a scale of a trend towards federal listing. 1) This buffer distance will filter out the vast majority of overland sediment flow [not channelized] before it can reach the creeks or lakes. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan (FP IV-33) that states: “Special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet” (IV-33). . Upland areas would be treated first and separately from riparian areas. 1) Empirical data from past fires in southern Utah show that trout populations are likely to survive at this level and habitat suffer only minor short-term negative impacts. . Snags (200-300/100 acres) and downed logs (50/10 acres) would be left which will help provide large wood for habitat formation/diversity. . Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. 1) The 100 foot no ignition zone along streams will trap the majority of overland sediment [not channelized] flow from shallower slopes along treated/burned areas and capture a portion of the sediment from steeper slopes. This will reduce sediment delivery to the streams. The 100-foot no ignition zone will likely maintain stream shading and stream temperature at levels nearly the same as for the no action alternative. A 100-foot no ignition zone will also likely maintain large woody debris levels very close to the no action alternative. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan for vegetation treated by burning (FP IV-49) that apply to wildlife, which states: “Limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values”. . The soils and hydrology report suggests very little additional risk of sediment delivery from areas burned at low intensity/severity. . The fish populations at the stations within the project area sampled appeared relatively robust. The majority of Manning Creek and its tributaries had good streambank stability as determined by Pfankuch adjusted for stream channel type (Petty 2004, Appendix I). . Prior to beginning implementation within a HUC6 subwatershed, an updated ERA model run will be made to incorporate newly undertaken permitted activities, recovery periods for past actions, etc., which will help plan implementation to reduce cumulative effects. The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to Bonneville cutthroat trout, their population will be maintained in the aquatic CEA in the longterm. Boreal Toad – The situation for the boreal toad is similar to the one above for Bonneville cutthroat trout (since they both occur in the Manning Creek drainage) with the following additional considerations project area wide: The following factors make impacts to boreal toad highly likely to occur from the proposed actions. 1) Treatment is proposed for 18-25% of the land area in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir 21-38% of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Barney Lake 43-62% of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Hunts Lake 29% of the area is proposed for treatment. Treatment is proposed for 27-36% of the Monroe Creek subwatershed. Above Magleby Reservoir 20-29% of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Annabella Reservoir 45-65% of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Big Lake 28-36% of the area is proposed for treatment and this does not include some i. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad effects at the 6th field HUC but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at levels over 15% due to potential watershed effects to breeding sites and riparian use areas (i.e. flooding may cause sediment deposition on breeding sites and downcutting that dewaters riparian areas and makes them unsuitable for future toad use). i. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad effects at the 6th field HUC at various ERA levels but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at levels over suggested TOCs. . In several subwatersheds, a considerable portion of mapped boreal toad habitat (RHCAs) already contains very high existing road densities, and planned temporary roads will increase this density further.  . Within the RHCAs, vegetation treatments would be limited to hand-thinning, horse, or helicopter thinning up to 100 feet from the stream or up to 328 feet from the known boreal toad breading ponds. . Within the RHCAs, no pile/slash burning would occur within 100 feet from the stream or breeding sites edge. Within the remainder of the RHCAs, pile or slash burning would occur on upland vegetation types during the Boreal toad dormant season (October 1 thru April 15) unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. Some scattered slash and slash piles may be left to provide habitat for boreal toads. . If any unmapped perennial streams or water sources in Boreal toad supporting habitat were encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 100-foot buffer. No treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. . Required monitoring of boreal toad populations and habitat use would occur (in addition to current levels by the UDWR) to document project effects and to help plan future vegetation management projects in boreal toad habitat. This would include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations (see Appendix J) . Dipping or drafting water for fire activities from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show a change in water levels from the use would be avoided, except for emergencies. . Within the RHCAs, prescribed burning would occur when generally low to moderate fire intensity and severities would be expected. Prescribed fire personnel would attempt to implement prescribed burning during the Boreal toad dormant season (1 October thru April 15). . No direct fire ignitions would occur within 100 feet from the streams and 328 feet from Boreal toad breeding ponds unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. Fire ignitions could occur outside these buffers and allowed to back into these areas. 1. The 100 foot no ignition zone along streams will trap the majority of overland sediment [not channelized] flow from shallower slopes along treated/burned areas and capture a portion of the sediment from steeper slopes. This will reduce sediment delivery to the streams. The 100-foot no ignition zone will likely maintain stream shading and stream temperature at levels nearly the same as for the no action alternative. A 100-foot no ignition zone will also likely maintain large woody debris levels very close to the no action alternative. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan for vegetation treated by burning (FP IV-49) that apply to wildlife, which states: “Limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values”. . A design feature was added to limit treatments in the Manning Meadow Reservoir, Barney Lake, Annabella Reservoir, and Big Lake subwatersheds to 20% at one time or a level that results in a current ERA modeling of less than or equal to the TOC of 10. This will reduce the potential impacts to boreal toads in these key subwatersheds. . There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on boreal toads (see cumulative effects section). The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to boreal toads, their populations will be maintained in the aquatic CEA. . Resident trout occur in Monroe Creek and its tributaries (including Magleby Lake on private land), Thompson Creek HUC (including Deep Lake and Annabella Reservoir), Water Canyon HUC (including Big Lake), Koosharem Creek, Greenwich Creek and its tributaries, and Box Creek and its tributaries (including upper and lower Box Creek Reservoir). The streams, lakes and reservoirs listed above provide high local value as recreational fisheries. . A considerable portion of the fish supporting drainages are planned for treatment under all action alternatives as discussed above in the Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad sections above. . Two of the streams in the project area not yet discussed above have only marginal stream stability (as measured by Pfankuch), which makes them more susceptible to project impacts. 1) Greenwich Creek stability was 57% good stability, 6% fair stability, and 37% poor stability. These streambanks will not be resistant to erosive energy from floods and high flows which have considerable suspended sediment and bedload. 2) Box Creek stability was 54% good stability, 24% fair stability, and 22% poor stability. These streambanks will not be resistant to erosive energy from floods and high flows which have considerable suspended sediment and bedload. The following factors and project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling and make it likely that while population scale effects could occur, they would not likely be at a scale of losing these resident fish populations.  . In areas where resident trout overlap boreal toad mapped RHCAs, boreal toad buffers will provide protection of resident trout habitat for mechanical treatments and prescribed fire treatments (see discussion in boreal toad section above). The factors described above for Bonneville cutthroat trout, boreal toads, and resident trout, make impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrates highly likely to occur from the proposed actions.  The following factors and project design features, in addition to all of the ones listed above for Bonneville cutthroat trout, boreal toads, and resident trout, reduce the effects expected and make it likely that while short to moderate-term effects could occur, they would not likely result in a long-term reduction of habitat quality for clean water aquatic macroinvertebrate taxa. . Belt et al. (1992 2:4, 5:6) indicates that a 98 foot buffer strip is adequate to maintain macroinvertebrate diversity at pre-harvest levels in clear-cut areas, where a 33 foot buffer strip was inadequate, which indicates the 100 foot (plus – depending on zone and treatment) buffer minimum within boreal toad occupied habitat will also help trap sediments from mechanical vegetation treatments and prescribed burning. . The soils and hydrology report suggests very little additional risk of sediment delivery from areas burned at low intensity/severity. . The is a project design feature of limiting 6th field HUC treatments to less than 15% of the sub-watersheds [moderate to high severities] at one time; empirical data from past fires in southern Utah show that at this level stream habitat is likely to suffer only minor or short-term negative impacts. . McGurk and Fong (1995) so no impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrates when 5% of a streamside impact zone was affected. This project has a design feature limiting riparian area treatments to 5-10% of a HUC6 until it has recovered, which will limit impacts to the short to moderate term. . There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on aquatic macroinvertabrates (see cumulative effects section). All of the above factors in combination will help protect the aquatic macroinvertebrate community structure, diversity, and BCI ratings in the aquatic CEA. SECTION 5: CUMULATIVE EFFECTS  This cumulative effects section considers the effects to the aquatic species previously discussed. The cumulative effects analysis area (CEA) for aquatic resources is shown in Figure 6. This area was selected on the basis of continuity of aquatic habitat and watershed areas found in the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project area. The cumulative effects being described include past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions. This area includes known or predicted habitat use areas of the aquatic species analyzed in this document.  In terms of fisheries, the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project areas streams and watersheds are changed from their pre-settlement condition. Water reservoirs, diversions, and canals alter the natural movement and timing of water in this watershed. The native cutthroat trout have been affected by new human land uses in the watershed, as well as the introduction of non-native trout species since pioneer settlement.  The cumulative effects discussed in detail below include: Cattle Grazing Vegetation Treatment Projects  Wildfires Recreational Activities Travel Management Special Uses Water Management   Cattle Grazing Cattle grazing has occurred for over 100 years within the CEA. Standards and guidelines for livestock grazing have been established in specific plans and are administered by rangeland specialists. Generally these plans permit moderate grazing utilization levels and incorporate a deferred or rest rotation system to allow for improved plant vigor and residual biomass on part of the allotment each year. Historic grazing typically removed more vegetation and was permitted for longer grazing seasons; this reduced vegetation that provided forage for some species, and nesting habitat with cover for other wildlife species. Currently through better rangeland management these effects are generally being reduced and improvement is occurring range wide as amount of vegetation and grazing seasons are more closely monitored and enforced. Grazing management decisions such as the Forest Utilization Standards and Guidelines (2001) provide direction for the management of livestock on National Forest System lands within the CEA on the Richfield Ranger District of the Fishlake National Forest.  Cumulative Effects   Cumulative effects result from the incremental impacts of pas t, present, and reasonably foreseeable future activities (regardless of what agency or person undertakes such actions) combined with the proposed activities considered in this document (40 CFR 1508.7). The analysis of cumulative effects recognizes that se parate activities can combine and interact to provide effects that are beyond the impacts of individual actions.    Cumulative effects reflect those reasonably foreseeable future actions that have been designed specifically enough to assess the impacts of the actions. Future actions that have not been specifically designed at the time of this analysis would be site specifically analyzed in future environmental analyses, to ensure that the cumulative effects of that future action combined with the actions pr oposed in this project have been appropriately analyzed.   Implementation of an action alternative may increase forage on upland areas. This may disperse grazing pressure more evenly throughout the area, and reduce grazing pressure in riparian areas and along creeks. Vegetation treatment projects include: prescribed burns, mechanical vegetation treatments, fuel reduction projects, firewood gathering, and noxious weed spraying. Previous mechanical fuels/vegetation treatments that are likely still affecting watershed function are included in the watershed ERA modeling in Appendix H. Vegetation Treatment Projects  Noxious weed spraying occurs in an effort to control or eliminate noxious weeds. Noxious weeds are more likely to gain footholds in disturbed areas such as along roads, dispersed campsites, grazed areas, and timber sales. Noxious weed control is an important management tool to prevent the spread and establishment these ecological pests. Spraying is done in accordance with an EA prepared for the Fishlake N.F. and has little cumulative effect to aquatic resources. Preventing the further spread of noxious weeds is a beneficial action.  Wildfires The vegetation communities on Monroe Mountain form a fire-adapted ecosystem, and there have been numerous wildfires historically. In the previous 15 years (2000-2009) there have been large wildfires, prescribed fires, and a prescribed fire that escaped prescription. Wildfires will likely continue to occur within the analysis area. Previous wildfires, managed wildfires, and prescribed fires that are likely still affecting watershed function are included in the watershed ERA modeling in Appendix H. Selection of the No Action Alternative may increase the probability of a large wildfire with more detrimental impacts to aquatic species due to fuel buildup and high fuel loadings.   Hunting is permitted across the CEA area during specified hunting seasons; the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources manages hunting. Mule deer and elk are hunted in three separate seasons (archery, muzzleloader, and general rifle). Herds are managed in accordance to established herd unit objectives. Hunting would have minimal effects on aquatic resources and would not be detrimental to species viability.  Many day use activities occur throughout the CEA area such as picnicking, sightseeing, antler shed hunting, firewood gathering, horseback riding, etc. Shed hunting has increased significantly during the last 10 years. This activity is generally at lower elevations and generally occurs during late winter and early spring. These activities are short duration by definition and the impacts of such to aquatic biota are minimal. The primary effect of this day use activity and hunting would be ATV use that might occur near streams, lakes, and riparian habitat, especially on poorly maintained, designed, or user created routes.  ATV (All-terrain Vehicles) riding is a popular activity by many local residents and others that come from all over the United States to experience trails open to ATV’s. A national ATV jamboree occurs in September in Sevier County and in the Fillmore area in late June of each year. Both attract 600-800 ATV riders to central Utah. There are various ATV trails and non-motorized trails within the CEA. Use statistics show that the amount of ATV use has been increasing over the last 15 years. There are a few individual companies that have special use permits to take people on ATV rides on approved trails. The impacts to aquatics are minimal except where trails are located in riparian areas, near streams or lakes, or actually ford streams.  Travel Management The Forest Travel Management Plan was updated in an intensive public participation process in association with an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) analysis of alternatives. The travel plan is now in the process of being implemented with signing of routes and closure of unautorized user created routes that were creating resource conflicts. The plan also closed the Forest to cross-country travel off of designated routes. The net effect of implementation of the new plan is reduce the current impacts to aquatic resources form ATVs as well as reducing the potential for future resource degradation from ATVs.  Special Uses Special uses occur throughout the CEA area such as: firewood and post cutting, outfitter and guide operations, municipal water developments, small mining claims, irrigation diversions, roads, water lines, etc. Special uses such as these are authorized by Special Use Permits; usually these permits require a separate environmental assessment, which discloses the impacts from these activities. The permits have requirements and are generally managed to have minimal environmental impacts.  Water Management Water management structures, canals, and other improvements are permitted as Special Uses and mentioned above. The primary effect has been to alter the amount and timing of water flows in natural channels. The effects to aquatic biota are discussed in the summary below. Summary of Cumulative Effects Bonneville Cutthroat Trout and Resident Trout   [Note - As currently designed, there is risk that 7th field HUC impacts and - of particular concern - debris flows from a debris flow prone subwatersheds could occur following treatment of a high percentage of these particular subwathersheds. It is likely that if these did occur, the trout population would persist in other locations within the 6th field HUC upstream of the confuence with the 7th field subwatershed or in other 7th field HUCs not directly connected to them. These impacts could be considerable where they do occur, however, thus caution has been recommended when conducting these treatments.] Boreal Toad  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the Proposed Action to boreal toads are expected to be of a short to mid-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the No Action alternative or the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable changes to boreal toads. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect population numbers or viability of boreal toads in the long term. Any adverse effects to aquatic species or aquatic habitat for future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest through the use of project design features. The activities listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase as a result of the action alternative.  [Note - As currently designed, there is risk that 7th field HUC impacts and - of particular concern - debris flows from a debris flow prone subwatersheds could occur following treatment of a high percentage of these particular subwathersheds. It is likely that if these did occur, the boreal toad population would persist in other locations within the 6th field HUC upstream of the confuence with the 7th field subwatershed or in other 7th field HUCs not directly connected to them. These impacts could be considerable where they do occur, however, thus caution has been recommended when conducting these treatments.]  Aquatic Macroinvertebrates  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, timber/thinning operations, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition and densities and riparian environments, which has affected macroinvertebrates in the cumulative effects area (CEA). Erosion, water manipulation (stream flows), and increased sediment are major factors affecting potentially suitable habitats for aquatic macroinvertebrates.  This has reduced habitat for clean water macroinvertebrate taxa, decreasing their populations and extent, which has an effect of reducing the Biotic Condition Index (BCI) in most cases. In some cases it may have improved habitat, raising the BCI. Often an effect of moderate increases in sedimentation and organic enrichment will be an increase in macroinvertebrate biomass and species richness as tolerant taxa become established, although at the expense of the cleanest water taxa which are lost (thus BCI scores will decrease slightly). As enrichment continues, however, biomass and species richness will begin to decline as sediments cover stream substrates and the majority of clean water taxa are eliminated, greatly reducing BCI scores.  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the Proposed Action to aquatic macroinvertebrates are expected to be of a short to mid-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the No Action alternative or one of the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable changes to the aquatic macroinvertebrate community. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect the aquatic macroinvertebrate community structure in the long term. Thus, the monitoring stations sampled would not be expected to decline in the long term with respect to the BCI index rating. Any adverse effects to aquatic species or aquatic habitat for future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest through the use of project design features. The activities listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase as a result of one of the action alternatives.  [Note - As currently designed, there is risk that 7th field HUC impacts and - of particular concern - debris flows from a debris flow prone subwatersheds could occur following treatment of a high percentage of these particular subwathersheds. It is likely that if these did occur, aquatic macroinvertebrates would persist in other locations within the 6th field HUC upstream of the confuence with the 7th field subwatershed or in other 7th field HUCs not directly connected to them. These impacts could be considerable where they do occur, however, thus caution has been recommended when conducting these treatments.]   SECTION 6. DETERMINATION AND RATIONALE  As a result of this evaluation it is my determination that implementation of any of the action alt ernatives (Alternatives 2 –  5) for the proposed Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration P roject may impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend towards Federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or spec ies for the sensitive species considered in this document.   T able 1 6 .  Determination of impact on the affected sensitive species  (Alternatives 2 - 5) .  SPECIES  DETERMINATION  Bonneville cutthroat trout MIIH Boreal toad MIIH NI  = No Impact  MIIH  = May Impact Individuals Or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend   Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species.  WIFV  = Will Impact Individuals Or Habitat With A Consequence That The Act ion  Will Contribute   To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species.  BI  = Beneficial Impact    Bonneville cutthroat trout ( Oncorhynchus clarki utah ) -  A determination of May Impact Individua ls or Habitat   is made for Bonneville cutthroat trout . See Aquatic Sensitive/MIS Summary for determination rationale.     SECTION 7. ADDITIONAL MITIGATION MEASURES  Boreal Toad Monitoring  Due to the nature of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project - which treats habitat across the majority of the mountain within, adjacent to, and upslope of boreal toad habitat that may affect boreal toad habitat through downstream effects, the recent introduction of chytrid fungus to Monroe Mountain and the likely concurrent population decline, and the fact that boreal toads have been petitioned for listing as a threatened species with a status review scheduled for completion by 2017, active monitoring of boreal toads before, during, and after project implementation is required to meet the MIIH determination by ensuring that project design features are implemented as designed, work as intended and are effective, and that site specific findings of toad use areas, timing, etc. can be incorporated into implementation actions. This monitoring will ensure that boreal toad impacts are minimized and of a scale that ensures the project will not lead towards federal listing. This monitoring has been included in the aquatics design features applicable to all alternatives for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project, and as such, is part of the proposed action.  Current monitoring is not adequate to determine trend (K. Wheeler, UDWR Native Aquatics biologist, email communication 7/28/14), not to mention survival rates, movements, habitat use, or identification of key habitat features needing protection. UDWR design feature recommendations to the Fishlake N.F. included the recommendation that “Monitoring of boreal toad populations (in addition to current levels by UDWR) should be implemented to document potential effects of proposed vegetation management. This should include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations.” (Appendix D).  While the exact nature of the monitoring program has not yet been designed, and needs future interagency coordination and cooperation to determine funding sources, personnel, and responsibilities before it can be finalized, Appendix J provides an example monitoring plan that would be sufficient to meet this need. It includes project objectives of determining changes in toad use areas, chytrid fungus infection rates/changes, finding key concentration areas such as breeding sites and hibernacula that should be buffered/protected, determining boreal toad use of areas planned for treatment, comparing toad use of treated vs. untreated habitat, and (to the extent possible) determining population size and survival data. AIS control measures and annual reporting requirements are also included.  Photos 28 and 29 (following page): These boreal toad hibernacula would not have been found and identified without the 2003-2004 radio tracking study. L – Typical hibernacula along small perennial seep that leads to underground root chamber under spruce/fir just behind the aspen. R – Deep buried root chamber under spruce along a flowing small perennial tributary in spruce/fir conifer habitat. M. Goates in photo. Other identified hibernacula included old beaver dams and burrows under riparian and transitional zone shrubs (see Photo 27).   Other Aquatics Monitoring  General aquatic monitoring has been included in the aquatics design features applicable to all alternatives for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project, and is part of the proposed action. This generally includes monitoring fish populations, stream flow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates one time before treatments are conducted, once right at completion of treatments, and one final time 3 to 5 years post treatment. Lake water quality monitoring would be similar, but would have water chemistry samples taken monthly during the summer (no samples during the remainder of the year). Finally, previously established hydrological channel monitoring stations would be repeated once before treatments, once right at the completion of treatments, and once 3-5 years post-treatment. This data will help validate design features and lead to better future project design, validate the effects analysis, and generally provide feedback to improve project planning and implementation to reduce aquatic biota impacts on other areas where landscape scale treatments are undertaken.  Additional Recommended Actions  The recommendation to conduct an up to date Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling run just prior to beginning treatments in a HUC6 subwatershed was moved/ has been included in the aquatics design features applicable to all alternatives for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project, and as such, is part of the proposed action.  and 9.7). These could help determine any potential threshold points and/or appropriate sized treatment areas to achieve desired results while lessening the probability of serious downstream consequences.  Recommended Additional Mitigation Measures  The following mitigation measures, in addition to the already described design features, are recommended to further reduce impacts to aquatic biota and/or provide monitoring data for any management adjustments necessary to improve future project design.  Rest degraded riparian areas adjacent to or below treatment sites prior to the actual treatments to increase riparian plant vigor and mass to help trap and hold sediment. Disperse treatments across watersheds and time to reduce impacts to aquatic biota. While large treatments are desirable to reduce ungulate browsing to aspen shoots, treating the same total area as a series of smaller areas in several watersheds over several years will likely result in fewer impacts to aquatics then treating a large block in one watershed within one year. If high erosion potential areas are found in post-implementation inspections, consider silt fence and/or straw-bale check dams within 300 feet of streams or ephemeral delivery channels as needed (similar to an existing design feature but focused on streams/channels).  As closely as possible follow recommendation of the former Fishlake Soil Scientist for soil water percentages that soil moisture sould be at least 8 to 10% water by weight regardless of the season when a unit is burned to protect soil and plant root crowns that can resprout following fire.  Past fire effects studies have often had limited description of fire severities. It is difficult to make quantitiative links between cause and effect without this data. Accurate mapping of the actual treatment areas burned, soil moistures, and associated fire severities in conjunction with the recommended aquatic monitoring listed above will provide data to further develop Forest specific relationships of treatment area/size, location within watersheds, proximity to streams, and fire severity to aquatic biota effects. Project monitoring should also be conducted to determine how well required project design features to protect aquatic resources were implemented. Such data will aid in planning future vegetation treatment projects in high value aquatic resource watersheds on the Forest.           SECTION 8. COMPLIANCE WITH MANAGEMENT DIRECTION / IRREVERSIBLE OR IRRETRIEVABLE COMMITMENTS OF RESOURCES  There would be no irreversible or irretrievable commitment of habitat associated with selection and implementation of the Proposed Action that affects threatened, endangered, or candidate aquatic biota.  This process has served to review the effects of implementing the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project on aquatic sensitive and management indicator species of the Fishlake National Forest. Adverse impacts that could affect the long-term viability of these aquatic sensitive and MIS species should be avoided provided the required design features listed above are implemented; thus the proposed project would meet Forest Plan Standards and Guidelines. See Appendix A for more information.     SECTION 9. REFERENCES  Belt, G.H., J.O. O'Laughlin, and T. Merrill. 1992. Design of forest riparian buffer strips for the protection of water quality: Analysis of scientific literature. Idaho Forest, Wildlife, Range Policy Group, Rept. 8, Univ. Idaho, Moscow, 35 pp. Browne, C.L. and C.A. Paszkowski. 2010. Hibernation Sites of Western Toads (Anaxyrus boreas): Characterization and Management Implications. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 5(1):49-63.  Cannon, S. H, J. E. Gartner, M, G. Rupert, J. A. Michael, A. H. Rea, and C. Parrett. 2010. Predicting the probability and volume of postwildfire debris flows in the Intermountain Western United States. GSA Bulletin 122(1/2):127-144.  Deiter, D. 2002. Fishlake National Forest 2001 Watershed Monitoring Report. USDA Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, UT 9pp.   Fridell, R.A., K.M. Comella, G.N. Garnett, B.A. Zettle, T.K. Smith, D.L. Harstad. 2000. Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas boreas) Distribution Surveys in Southwestern Utah 1994-1998.  Goates, M.C. 2006. The Dogma of the 30 Meter Riparian Buffer: The Case of the Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas boreas). M.S. Thesis. Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 48pp.  Hadley, M. J. 2014. Big Lake and Deep Lake 2014 Trend Net Survey. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J. 2013c. Upper and Lower Box Creek Reservoirs 2013 Trend Netting. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. Hadley, M. J. and R.D. Hepworth. 2013. Trapping and Spawning of Bonneville Cutthroat Trout at Manning Meadow Reservoir, 2013. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J. 2012. Field Survey Report - Trout Population Survey Fish Creek and East Fork Fish Creek. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, and J. E. Whelan. 2011a. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Middle Sevier River drainage, Utah, 2008-2010. Publication number 11-02. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 46pp.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, and M .E. Golden. 2011b. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Upper Virgin River drainage, Utah, 2009-2010. Publication number 11-03. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 35 pp.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, M .E. Golden, and J. E. Whelan. 2010. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Upper Sevier River and East Fork Sevier River drainages, 2008- 2009. Publication number 10-20. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 32 pp.  Hepworth, D. K. 2005. Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Southern Region Aquatics Program Manager (retired), Personal communication regarding average southern Utah stream fish biomass levels.  Hogrefe, T.C., C.L. Bailey, P.D. Thompson, and B. Nadolski. 2005. Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas boreas) Conservation Plan in the State of Utah. Utah Publication Number 05-37. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 65 pp.   Lentsch, L., Y. Converse, and J. Perkins. 1997. Conservation agreement and strategy for Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) in the State of Utah. Publication No. 97-19. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 73pp.   , B.J. D.R.   621   Petty, Jeff. 2006a. Level II Riparian Survey Fishlake National Forest: Box Creek. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Petty, Jeff. 2006b. Level II Riparian Survey Fishlake National Forest: Koosharem Creek Watershed. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Petty, Jeff. 2004. Level II Riparian Survey Fishlake National Forest: Manning Creek. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Pilliod, D.S. and E. Wind (editors). 2008. Habitat Management Guidelines for Amphibians and Reptiles of the Northwestern United States and Western Canada. Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation, Technical Publication HMG-4, Birmingham, AL. 139pp.  Platts, W. and M. McHenry. 1988. Density and Biomass of Trout and Char in Western Streams. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical Report INT- 241. 17 p.  Rieman, B., D. Lee, J. McIntyre, K. Overton, and R. Thurow. 1993. Consideration of extinction risks for salmonids. Fish Habitat Relationships Technical Bulletin No. 14. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Boise, Idaho. 12 pp. (cited in Appendix B)  Rittenhouse, T. A.G. and R.D. Semlitsch. 2007. Distribution of Amphibians in Terrestrial Habitat Surrounding Wetlands. Wetlands 27(1):153-161.  Wheeler, K. 2014. WCFO Field Report – Boreal Toad Breeding Surveys, July 21-24, 2014. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region. 2014a. Fire Operational Guidelines for Preventing the Spread of Aquatic Invasive Organisms. Ogden, UT.  USDA Forest Service. 1986. Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan. Richfield, UT.  Vandewege, M.W., T.M. Swannack, K.L. Greuter, D.J. Brown, and M.R.J. Forstner. 2013. Breeding Site Fidelity and Terrestrial Movement of an Endangered Amphibian, the Houston Toad (Bufo houstonensis). Herpetological Conservation and Biology 8(2):435- 446. Wheeler, K. and B. McCormick. 2014. WCFO Field Report – Boreal Toad Inventory Surveys, July 8-12, 2014. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 14pp.  Wheeler, K. 2013. WCFO Field Report – Boreal Toad Inventory Surveys, June 19-22, 2013. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. Whelan, J. E. 2002. Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Monitoring Results of the 1995 and 1996 Rotenone Treatments of Manning Creek, Utah. Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Publication No. 02-04. Salt Lake City, UT. 34pp. Whelan, J. E. 2003. Results of the Oldroyd Wildfire North Fork of Box Creek Aquatic Resources and Straw Wattle Treatment Effectiveness Monitoring 2000-2002. USDA Forest Service, Richfield, UT. 22pp.    A position paper was developed in 2000 by a multi-agency and multi-state effort as a direct result of an Inland Cutthroat Trout meeting held in Salt Lake City in February 2000. This position paper described genetic considerations for cutthroat trout management (Utah Division of Wildlife Resources 2000). This position paper further defined cutthroat trout conservation populations into two categories as described below.      Fish Resource Management Standards and Guidelines a. Maintain 40% or more of overhanging grasses, forbs, sedges, and shrubs along banks of streams. The Aquatic report has additional information on fish and riparian habitat in the project area. Overhanging vegetation has not generally been sampled or evaluated, but will generally be met where other land uses are being administered within their plans, standards and guidelines. Stable streambank length has not been measured but is generally accounted for with the IRE Pfankuch stability measures, which show generally good conditions on project area streams. Stream substrate size is not generally considered an issue on Monroe streams, and upper elevation BCI results where sampled have generally been above or close to standards. With the required design features listed in the EIS and aquatic specialist report it is anticipated that project effects would be short to moderate-term in duration, particularly at the HUC 6 watershed scale. This would prevent long-term degradation of fish habitat measures. b. Maintain 50% or more of total streambank length in stable condition where natural conditions allow c. No more than 25% of stream substrate should be covered by inorganic sediment less than 3.2 mm in size where natural conditions allow. d. Maintain a Biological Condition Index (BCI) of 75 or greater. needed. Therefore, the intent of this standard is being met.   Riparian Area Management Standards and Guidelines  a. Follow direction in FSM 2526 and 2527. This Forest Service manual direction deals with riparian, floodplain, and wetland protection. IRE surveys show much of the riparian habitat on Monroe Mountain is in good condition or stable trend (see Aquatic Report for additional information). Protective measures (required design features) are identified for the action alternatives that will prevent long-term degradation of riparian habitat and resource values. Therefore the action alternatives meet the intent of this standard. b. Maintain riparian dependent resource values including wildlife, fish, vegetation, watershed, and recreation in a stable or upward trend.  General Direction: Design and implement activities in management areas to protect and manage the riparian ecosystem. Standards and Guidelines  Application to Project  a. none listed. The required project design features for the action alternatives should prevent any long-term change in the water or sediment regimes within the CEA watersheds that could affect riparian resource values. Therefore, the intent of this standard would be met by the action alternatives.  a. prohibit the operation of motorized equipment within the riparian area except at constructed stream crossings. Standards and Guidelines Application to Project With the required design features listed in the EIS and aquatic specialist report the action alternatives will meet the intent of this standard in the longterm (see the Aquatic report and Fish Resource Management section above for additional information). General Direction: Locate and construct arterial and collector roads to maintain the basic natural condition and character of riparian areas. a. locate roads outside of riparian area except for stream crossings or where other feasible alternatives do not exist. and Guidelines Application to Project The temporary roads proposed in the action alternatives do not cross fish supporting streams and would thus not have any impacts to fish passage. Project design features have requirements for boreal toad passage if culverts are needed on temporary roads. Therefore the action alternatives meet the intent of this standard. Water Resource Improvement and Maintenance Standards and Guidelines General Direction: Improve or maintain water quality to meet State water quality standards. However, where the natural background water pollutants cause degradation, it is not necessary to implement improvement actions. Short-term or temporary exceedance of some parameters of the State standard, such as increased sediment from road crossing construction or water resource development may be permitted in special cases. Standards and Guidelines  Application to Project  a. Follow requirements of the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act, and Clean Water Act. Water quality has been monitored for many years on the Fishlake. Short-term impacts are permitted by this standard, but would be minimized by the project design features. With the required design features listed in the EIS and aquatic specialist report the action alternatives meet the intent of this standard.  Project Area MapGeneral Direction: Reduce project caused, on site, erosion rates through designed management practices and appropriate erosion mitigation, vegetation, or restoration measures. Appendix B  Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (BCT) Risk to Persistence  Rieman et al. (1993) reviews processes that contribute to local and regional extinctions of salmonids. Planning and assessments need to consider habitat disruption and population response at the local and regional scale and replication, dispersion, and connections among populations. They note that extinction risks for salmonids are influenced by complex interacting factors that are difficult to quantify. Quantitative viability analysis models have been developed for use in situations such as anadromous salmon populations where extensive data collection and passage counts at dams have allowed estimation of fecundity and survival parameters for different life stages. This data is not available for Bonneville and Colorado River cutthroat trout populations on the Fishlake National Forest, nor is it reasonable to obtain (due to cost and sampling impacts to the population being monitored). Given the lack of data, Rieman et al. (1993) provides a useful understanding of the nature of extinction process that can be used to formulate management prescriptions that minimize risks to individual populations.  Risks to local populations can be described as deterministic, stochastic, and genetic. Deterministic processes are a change in the environment that results in a sustained decreased birth rate or increased death rate. Examples for trout would be elimination of large wood decreasing the number of large pools needed during low summer flows or for overwinter habitat, increase in fine sediments that degrade spawning habitat, and increased competition or predation with introduction of exotic fish. Rieman et al. (1993, p. 2) notes that “Any habitat change that irreversibly reduces survival or growth at any life stage increases the risk of deterministic extinction” [emphasis added by this author] and that “Much, if not most, of the loss of salmonid populations probably results from habitat change and other actions…..that induce deterministic responses”.  Stochastic processes are chance events. They can be further categorized as environmental and demographic. Environmental stochastic processes include drought and catastrophic fire events. Catastrophic fire events and subsequent flooding lead to the loss of 4 Bonneville cutthroat trout populations in southern Utah from 2001 through 2003. All of these populations have since been refounded by reintroductions (Hadley et al. 2010 and 2011b). A catastrophic fire event in 2010 has placed another Bonneville cutthroat trout population at risk of loss (Hadley et al. 2011c). Drought, climate change, and fire have become increasing concerns in recent years (Cannon and DeGraff 2009, Hadley et al. 2011a, 2011b, and 2011c). Demographic stochastic processes – small random variations in birth and survival rates – can also lead to extinction and is of most concern in very small populations. Temporal variability that affects recruitment and survival is another component of this stochastic risk. Habitat complexity, watershed health, and weather patterns are integrated into the total risk component. Stable flow regimes and weather patterns, complex habitat that provides refuges, and healthy watershed conditions would combine to create a relatively low risk. Frequent flood and drought events (common in southern Utah), coupled with poor watershed conditions that make the watershed more “flashy”, and simplified habitat that provides less refuges would raise this risk to high.  Some important points raised by Rieman et al. (1993) regarding stochastic events are that the risk increases sharply as populations drop below 1,000-2,000 individuals, and that loss of habitat (quality and quantity, i.e. smaller less complex habitats) increases the risks from stochastic events.  Genetic risks are more theoretical, but are based on modeling that indicates minimum population sizes are needed to maintain the genetic diversity of a population and prevent genetic drift or inbreeding depression. One suggested population level for maintaining genetic diversity in closed populations is the 50/500 rule, where 50 is the minimum needed to prevent inbreeding and 500 is needed to maintain genetic variation (Rieman et al. 1993). This is effective (breeding animals) population size, which is less than (or a subset of) the total population. Recent experience suggests that genetic risks are a secondary concern to cutthroat trout compared to environmental stochastic processes. These processes can interact to increase the risks to populations. Habitat changes, for example, that isolate, simplify, or reduce the amount of habitat can increase the risk to a population from environmental stochastic events or genetic factors.  Rieman et al. (1993) goes on to note that local extinctions were and still are part of a natural part of regional population dynamics. Connected populations that form a “metapopulation” allow for dispersal, emigration, and recolonization that help regional populations survive. Land management has also disrupted metapopulation processes by water diversions, dams, habitat changes, and introductions of exotic species. Some streams in southern Utah have become naturally isolated by climate change since the Pleistocene due to either reduced stream flows drying up connections or water warmer than salmonids can tolerate becoming thermal barriers. The island mountain geography also naturally fragments habitat, reducing metapopulation potential in the Intermountain West. Rieman et al. (1993, p. 7) concludes by saying “We believe maintaining strong populations in the best possible habitats throughout the landscape and preserving metapopulation structure and function are the best hedges against extinction”. [Note - there have also been some benefits to local populations from isolation. This has primarily been protection from non-native trout species that allowed pure remnant genetic stocks to survive. It is also useful to help prevent the spread of Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) and diseases. Where local populations are isolated, fisheries biologists must take the role of the dispersal and recolonization agent.]  Based on the above discussion, the Bonneville cutthroat trout stream within the project area has been rated using the professional opinion of J. Whelan, Forest Fisheries Biologist, based on existing population and habitat data, and entered into the table below derived from Table 1: Relative risk of extinction for local populations found in Rieman et al. (1993, p. 8). The table below describes the current management conditions in black with short to moderate timeframe shifts due to project impacts in orange. It is important to understand that the short-term habitat effects of the proposed action primarily affect the growth and survival category rated as a deterministic risk, and secondarily temporal variability through watershed function/resiliency. It must be kept in mind those changes affect two variables within the larger suite of risk elements, many of which are fixed (not affected by management actions) regardless of the effects of any of the action alternatives. Also, other land management uses (such as livestock grazing) and management changes may also affect growth and survival (deterministic risk). While the action alternatives would likely result in short to moderate term impacts to the deterministic risks, the no action may result in increased stochastic risk over time.  Table B-1: Manning Creek population Characteristics Risk of Local Population Extinction High Extreme Stochastic X Growth/Survival X---- X Isolation Stochastic X Explanation: Population Size – low risk as population is over several thousand individuals and includes all life stages. Growth, Survival – habitat quality is generally good and near potential in many parts of the drainage, which provides optimum conditions for the fish population to respond to short-term events. Population is stable. Project effects could shift this factor to the moderate-high level in the short to moderate term, moving back to moderate and then low in the long term. unique remnant, is a mix with genetic diversity. While this should not be used for replication everywhere, it provides a stock with genetic diversity that may increase adaptability to changing conditions, and is well suited for a broodstock used for replication to some streams and for sport fishing use. Synchrony – Following reintroduction into Clear Creek this stock has been placed into two large high quality/complex habitat situations, which reduces synchrony risk. These populations are on different mountain ranges that also reduce the risk that one fire could impact all of the populations. Long-term trends, however, have been for more extreme regional droughts that could affect all of southern Utah at one time, as well as raise the risk of multiple fires affecting many of the populations. Thus this risk remains moderate to high.  The two tables above, along with the supporting explanative text, show that Manning Creek is relatively resistant to project effects due to its size, habitat complexity, and relatively good condition, and that the genetic stock in Manning Creek is not a unique genetic stock, but a mix from several BCT streams. Table B-1 shows, however, that the project will increase risks to this population in the short to moderate term, and experience on the Forest has shown that even habitat near its potential can be overwhelmed from serious fire effects such as a debris flow. Still, Manning Creek has more resiliency than the typical Fishlake N.F. BCT stream to date (for comparison, the Clear Creek drainage should be more resistant after habitat there recovers over the long-term from the Twitchell Canyon fire).  This does not mean Manning Creek does not have conservation risks. The primary risk is to the actual broodstock itself located in Manning Meadow Reservoir. This broodstock represents an investment of many years of work, over a million dollars, and has been and is critical for native fish use for sport fishing, replicating new BCT conservation populations into certain streams, and continued support of BCT populations in some streams. The success of the Manning Creek broodstock was an important factor in the FWS decision that listing of BCT was not warranted. Broodstocks cannot just be located anywhere; the set of conditions that make for a successful broodstock make such sites rare or infrequent. Replacement of the Manning Creek broodstock would take years and extensive funds, and there would be no guarantee that the replacement would meet DWR needs as well as Manning Meadow Reservoir has. These factors thus warrant high levels of caution for planning and implementing projects in the watershed above the Manning broodstock.  The secondary risk is to BCT lake habitat on the Fishlake N.F. The Manning Creek drainage is unique on the Fishlake N.F. as it is the only BCT conservation drainage with lake habitat. BCT occur in both Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake. These lakes provide a place for BCT to live in a lake setting, maintain genetic diversity useful for lake living, and provide an important recreational fishery for large BCT, which also helps increase angler support for this native trout. These factors also warrant caution when planning and implementing projects in the watersheds above these lakes.    Appendix D  UDWR Recommended Design Features (Developed by UDWR working group as provided by K.Wheeler 4/24/14)  Utah Division of Wildlife Resources Recommendations for Boreal Toad habitat protection on Monroe Mountain.  . Utilize Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) of 100 meters from each side of streams as buffers for timber sales. Use of 100-meter buffers should protect most boreal toads, even in active season (Goates et al. 2007), and should protect water and habitat quality in adjacent and downstream habitats. USDA LOGO. Monitoring of boreal toad populations (in addition to current levels by UDWR) should be implemented to document potential effects of proposed vegetation management. This . Known breeding ponds should be protected by buffers of 200 meters from the high-water mark. This is to provide increased habitat protection in areas of high, year-around use. Some studies show that this buffer will not protect some toads and hibernacula (Bull 2006, Brown and Paszkowski 2010), but should protect the majority (Bartelt et al. 2004, Muths 2003).  . In order to protect boreal toads and hibernacula from being crushed, no mechanized harvesting equipment should be permitted within these RHCAs and breeding site buffers. . If vegetation management is necessary within the RHCAs and breeding site buffers, hand-thinning and/or helicopter harvest may be used in these areas.  . Felled trees should be removed from the buffers or piled and burned at least 100’ from stream edge. Snags (200/ 100 acres in aspen, 300/ 100 acres in conifer/ spruce fir) and downed logs (50/ 10 acres) should be left as cover for toads.  . Prescribed burning may be used within RHCAs and breeding site buffers, so long as the ignition point is 30 m from the stream (backburning), and done during inactive season (10/1 – 4/15). Ignition types, timing, and location should be designed to create low to moderate intensity within the RHCAs and breeding site buffers and to avoid highintensity fires in these areas. Snags (200/ 100 acres in aspen, 300/ 100 acres in conifer/ spruce fir) and downed logs (50/ 10 acres) should be left as cover for toads.  . Temporary roads should not be allowed within RHCAs and breeding site buffers.  . Avoid dipping or drafting water from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show more change in water levels from the impact. Use of water from larger lakes is preferred. Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) precautionary standards should be implemented to prevent transfer of chytrid fungus or other AIS between watersheds. should include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations.  Literature cited  Bartelt, P.E., C.R. Peterson, and R.W. Klaver. 2004. Sexual differences in the post-breeding movements and habitats selected by western toads (Bufo boreas) in southeastern Idaho. Herpetologica 60(4): 455-467.  Brown, C.L. and Paszkowski, C.A. 2010. Hibernation sites of western toads (Anaxyrus boreas): characterization and management implications. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 5(1): 49-63.  Bull, E.L. 2006. Sexual differences in the ecology and habitat selection of western toads (Bufo boreas) in northeastern Oregon. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 1(1): 27-38.  Goates, M.C., K.A. Hatch, and D.L. Eggett. 2007. The need to ground truth 30.5 m buffers: a case study of the boreal toad. Biological Conservation 138: 474-483.  Muths, E. 2003. Home range and movements of boreal toads in undisturbed habitats. Copeia (2003)1: 160-165.     Appendix E  Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest  Boreal Toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas) Management Recommendations (4/08/14 as provided by P. Chase)  Introduction  During the past 20 to 25 years, dramatic declines and disappearances of amphibian populations have been observed and documented worldwide (Barinaga 1990, Blaustein and Wake 1990, Phillips 1990). One of the species that has experienced such a dramatic decline is the boreal toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas). Although once considered fairly common in most mountainous areas in northern Utah, southern Idaho and western Wyoming, it is much less common today, and absent from some of the areas where it occurred historically. Reasons for the decline are being investigated. Although causes for the decline have not all been completely investigated or clearly identified, discovery of boreal toad die-offs due to the chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) point to this pathogen as the proximate cause of deaths of boreal toads in at least some populations. In general, lack of suitable habitat does not appear to be a significant limiting factor for boreal toads on the Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest.   The boreal toad occupies forest habitats at elevations of about 4,500 to 12,000 feet in Utah, Idaho, and western Wyoming. Boreal toads occupy three different types of habitat during the course of the year: breeding ponds, summer range, and overwinter refugia. Generally these specific habitats occur within lodgepole pine or spruce-fir forests, however, several known breeding sites occur in lower elevation willow/sage communities.  Breeding takes place in shallow, quiet water in lakes, marshes, bogs, ponds, and wet meadows, often with egg placement optimizing thermal effects of the summer sun. There are no empirical data that suggest a pattern in selection of water body type or size. Breeding has been recorded from large permanent lakes, glacial kettle ponds, man-made ponds, beaver ponds, marshes, and roadside ditches. Breeding generally occurs between early May and early June, but may be as late as July at higher elevations, coinciding with the melting of the winter snowpack.  Young toads are restricted in distribution and movement by available moist habitat, while adults can move several miles (3-5 miles) and reside in marshes, wet meadows, or forested areas.  Hibernacula, or hibernation chambers, are reported to need a continuous flow of ground water beneath the chamber floor to prevent freezing of hibernating adults (Campbell 1970b). However, Goettl (unpubl. 1996) found boreal toads avoid freezing by using ground squirrel burrows, descending below the frost line to an average temperature of 40° F (4.5° C). Other possible hibernation sites, particularly for newly metamorphosed toadlets, are beaver lodges and dams. Toads emerge from hibernacula in early May to early June, depending on elevation, and return in between late August to late September. They may re-emerge to bask near the hibernacula entrance during warm days in September and October.  Management Recommendations Boreal toad can be susceptible to a number of activities conducted on/by the Forest. Generally, best management practices and Forest Plan direction (standards and guidelines) are in place and would likely protect boreal toad from most activities. However, other activities regularly conducted by the Forest could have significant effects without additional mitigation. Livestock Grazing: Wetland habitats are frequently altered by damming or dredging water sources to make them more suitable for livestock watering. These modifications usually result in higher concentrations of livestock in and around wetlands. Although livestock impacts may be intensified in these areas, stock pond development can increase the amount of still water containing shallow areas of emergent vegetation (critical for breeding). On the Uinta-Wasatch- Cache National Forest, in Utah, boreal toads are regularly observed breeding in several of these areas, and stock pond development may have actually increased the amount of suitable toad breeding habitat. Livestock grazing can impact amphibians directly by crushing or indirectly by altering habitat. However, recent studies by Burton et al. (2009) found true toads (Bufo sp) may be impacted less by environmental changes associated with cattle grazing. In fact, allowing controlled livestock access in wetlands may even have a positive effect on Bufo sp due to reducing vegetative growth and allowing open water to occur. Stock ponds constructed for livestock watering have been identified as preferred breeding sites for toads in some instances. To avoid impacts to toads associated with stock ponds the following is recommended: 1) Prior to construction/reconstruction (cleaning) of a stock pond, a full amphibian survey should be conducted (An exception to this is ponds that capture melting snow. These ponds are often dry by mid-summer and construction/reconstruction (cleaning) can occur as soon as they are dry.) 2) If a survey cannot be conducted, wait until after October 15 to clean pond. (rationale, boreal toad should be using their hibernacula by this time) 3) When possible include a shallow area (less than 1’ in depth) on North end of the pond to provide breeding habitat. At a minimum, this shallow area would be 20 square feet in size (rationale, boreal toad egg masses are often spread over 16 square feet). If North end proves to be impractical, place shallow area on either the East, West, or South side in this order of preference. (When pond maintenance is proposed for ponds with or near known populations of boreal toad, an aquatic biologist should participate in pond design and during construction.) 4) If breeding sites are negatively impacted by livestock grazing, permanent or temporary fencing will be constructed (UNF 2003 Plan) WL&F-17 Guideline: Protect known  3. WCNF 2003 Plan (G12) Locate new actions (such as incident bases, fire suppression camps, staging areas, livestock handling facilities, recreation facilities, roads and improvements including trails) outside of Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas. If the only suitable location for such actions is within Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas, sites will be located to minimize resource impacts. 4. WCNF 2003 Plan (G13) Any long-term crossing of stream channels containing fish habitat will provide for desirable aquatic passage. 7. (UNF 2003 Plan) Aqua-5 Guideline: Avoid equipment operation in stream courses, open water, seeps, or springs. If use of equipment in such areas is required, impacts should be minimized. 8. (UNF 2003 Plan) M&E-3 Guideline: Modify the operating plans for existing permits to eliminate impacts that prevent attainment of aquatic Forest Plan management direction. Seek to avoid adverse effects to populations of native aquatic organisms. Recreation: Recreation is a widespread activity that can pose a threat to boreal toads and their habitat. Final recreational destinations are often riparian areas that may concurrently support boreal toad habitat. Recreational activities that may impact boreal toads or their habitat include camping, hiking, biking, skiing, fishing, and off-road vehicle use. Early boreal toad life stages, from egg to toadlet, are particularly susceptible to trampling, which can result in direct mortality. Indirect effects of fishing, camping, hiking, skiing, and off-road vehicle use are loss of vegetative bank cover from trail construction and trampling, reduction of water quality from bank or shoreline erosion, fecal contamination, and the deposition of other human refuse. Developing eggs and tadpoles are most sensitive to reduced water quality. To avoid impacts to toads associated with recreation the following is recommended:  1) When constructing new trails/camping area or where needed reconstruct existing trails/camping areas away from known boreal toad breeding sites in accordance with the forest plan direction. 2) If existing trails lead to or by toad breeding sites, relocate the trail when possible. 3) (UNF 2003 Plan) WL&F-17 Guideline: Protect known occupied boreal toad habitat from disturbance (e.g., trampling) during the active breeding season (generally four to five weeks following snowmelt). Timber and Fire Management: Direct effects from timber sale activities include mortality of toads crushed by equipment used during pre-sale, harvest, or post-sale activities. Effects also come about through habitat changes that occur due to tree removal.  Fire management and wild fires can cause direct mortality of toads. However, fire is a natural event through which boreal toads, as a population or species, have historically survived. Fire and fire suppression indirectly affect boreal toad habitat by altering the course of vegetative changes. These changes in vegetation may result in either a positive or negative impact to boreal toads. To avoid impacts to toads associated with timber and fire management the following is recommended:  1) Utilize riparian habitat conservation areas (RHCAs) as buffers for timber sales. 2) Avoid temporary roads or other disturbance in RHCAs. 3) Avoid dipping or drafting water from known boreal toad breeding sites. 4) Support late fall prescribed burns to avoid times when toads are active.    Appendix F Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) Northwest*Habitat Management Guidelines (HMG) With additional measures incorporated from the Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Plan (Hogrefe et al. 2005) (*Southwest are still in development) During communication with amphibian professionals during project development, it was noted that the most comprehensive set of habitat management guidelines for amphibians had been developed by PARC in regional sets. The Southwest document, which includes Utah, is still in development, so the Northwest set was adopted for this planning process, since this area contains extensive boreal toad habitat and the Northwest area abuts Utah. Compatible and optimum HMPs were paraphrased and combined by broad subjects for simplification. HMG numbers (P1, P2, etc.) are the addition of this author for easy reference in this analysis. In addition, habitat management guidelines from the Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Plan (UCP) were summarized and included. Where they overlapped the PARC guideline they are included in the same row. If similar but slightly different, the UCP guideline was summarized on a separate row just below the respective PARC guideline. Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Plan numbers are from that document. Note that the summary table included within this appendix does not include habitat management guidelines for private lands including commercial or residential land development and agricultural activities (these are included in both documents, but are not relevant to this public land planning and analysis). Note on Boreal Toad habitat types from PARC Table p118: General (Gen) are from the initial HMG table that apply to all habitat types. Preferred - Seasonal wetlands (SW), permanent wetlands (PW) Suitable – Moist coniferous forests (MCF), dry coniferous forests (DCF), mixed conifer and deciduous forest (MCDF), moist and dry deciduous forest (DF), alpine and subalpine (A), pinyon-juniper (PJ), boreal forest (B) [not listed in table but listed in boreal forest section], river and large stream (RS), small streams (SS), springs and seeps (SP), riparian area (RA), reservoir (R) Marginal - Sagebrush steppe (SB), grassland [not used below as most HMGs were for low elevation grassland] Table F-1: PARC Habitat Management Guidelines (HMG) with Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Plan (HCP) HMGs added. PARC No. PARC HMG Habitat Type PARC notes Other Reference notes Monroe Mountain BT comments Project comments and/or Relation to Forest Plan  Habitat/Linkages      P1 Ensure availability and protection of all essential and critical habitat types Gen, RA Breeding, hibernation , feeding  Breeding sites and hibernacula are key sites on MM Design features include measures for this HMG P2 UCP3.2.1 Maintain un-fragmented habitat. Minimize activities in corridors Gen, DCF, B, RA, SS, SW Dispersal, movement; 50-330 feet buffer on each side of streams UCP-Prevent further habitat fragmentation of breeding populations by ID/preserve dispersal corridors and metapopulation structure Stream corridors are important for BT movement (Goates 07). BT mapped habitat is 100m on each side of streams. Existing activities occur in this zone. Mapped boreal toad habitat is 100m on streams and 300m on breeding sites, but some project activities are allowed within this UCP3.2.2 Restore historic dispersal corridors where possible   UCP – ID corridors, improve habitat in degraded corridors, remove dispersal barriers   P3 Manage for a variety of stand ages and types at stand and landscape level Retain cool moist microhabitats for forest associated amphibians P7 Manage riparian areas for biodiversity Riparian areas are highest diversity and most restricted habitat type (<1.5% forestwide) P8 Maintain/restore native vegetation structure Grazing is likely affecting riparian and aspen structure in some stream reaches P9 Consider a mix of protective measures, such as differing buffer widths, limited and noentry P10 Maintain natural wetland habitats and nearby uplands through the use of buffers Retain a representative proportion of aspen stands within the landscape DF banks, meanders, riparian vegetation, stream wetlands P13 Focus management actions on achieving desired stream conditions (i.e. water temperatures, no/minimal sedimentation, long-term input woody debris SS    Design features are generally configured to meet habitat needs P14 Identify and specially manage stream reaches in natural and minimally disturbed watersheds RS Undisturbed streams provide unique habitats not found in managed watersheds  IRE Level II data may provide information on. Most headwaters and BT habitat actively managed. Project Area Mapof this project  or BT conservation agreement. P26 Buffer permanent and seasonal wetlands SW, PW Min 30-50 feet for seasonal wetlands   Design features include measures for this HMG for permanent wetlands dispersal corridors (3.9.1.b), avoid breaching ponds that provide habitat (3.9.2.d), prevent filling or draining of wetlands (3.9.1.c, 3.9.2.e) UCP3.9 Create and restore habitat through water management   UCP-Create shallow shoreline margins in impoundments (3.9.3.a), Create new wetlands (3.9.3.c)    Mechanical harvest/veg management  P32 Schedule log-hauling adjacent to amphibian habitat in dry months or fall/winter Gen   Main roads open to all traffic. Weather patterns and road access makes application of this more difficult. P33 Other grey literature uses 15 tons/acre but notes additional research needed to verify. This level may be low. P34 Other grey literature has figures but additional research needed to verify – levels may be too low Minimize logging on steep slopes GIS averages slope, can allow harvest on local slopes > 40%. Most N. Forests limit harvest to slopes <35% Avoid dragging logging materials across streams and seeps  P38  In timber management areas, plan for connectivity between stands Gen      P40 Restore historic disturbance regimes – fire Gen, A, SB    Part of the purpose and need of the proposed project P41 Use prescribed fire to restore natural fire regimes Gen, DCF, DF, SB Fire should mirror historic fire intervals and seasons. Avoid key amphibian times   Part of the purpose and need of the proposed project but seasons and fire severities (due to fuel buildups) may be outside of historic conditions P42 UCP3.1.2 Conduct prescribed burns in late fall after first frost DCF  UCP-Restrict burns to late fall through early spring  Project describes this as desirable but not mandatory P43 In fuel/veg treatments retain some untreated areas as refugia DCF    Fire has a 60% treatment target. Mechanical vegetation treatments have a design feature to leave untreated areas in RHCAs. P44 PJ veg/fuel treatments (condensed for this project) PJ PARC: Several HMGs – expand if relevant to project   Beyond the scope of this project P45 Sagebrush veg/fuel treatments (condensed for this project) SB PARC: Several HMGs – expand if relevant to project   Beyond the scope of this project UCP3.1.1 Protect habitats in forest stands [from fire] adjacent to and within 2.5 miles (4km) of breeding sites   UCP- Needs additional literature to support   UCP3.1.3 Determine impacts of fire through monitoring of known breeding sites     Project has required monitoring in Appendix J  Transportation Networks      P46 Prohibit off-road motorized use Gen, B, PJ, SB, SW  UCP- Prohibit offroad motorized use within 50m of wetland or riparian areas (3.5.2.b)  Beyond the scope of this project. Forest travel plan is ‘closed unless signed open’. P47 Avoid roads in riparian areas. Avoid orienting roads parallel to riparian areas. RA, SS  UCP-Close motorized routes within 50 meters of breeding sites where feasible (3.5.2.c) Existing roads do occur within or along riparian areas Beyond the scope of this project P48 Consider effects of existing roads on riparian areas SS    Beyond the scope of this project P49 Close unneeded roads, avoid construction of new roads Gen    All action alternatives have some temporary road construction in RHCAs, but Alternatives 4 and 5 have the largest amount. Some roads relocated slightly in Water Canyon HUCs to reduce impacts. P50 Install arch culverts and tunnels in roadways. Replace old/failed culverts with passage friendly structures Gen, RA, SS  UCP – Install culverts and bridges to allow for natural riparian zones and stream flows (3.7.1.a)  Required as design feature on any new roads in BT habitat P51 Gate existing roads Gen     UCP3.7.1 Minimize dispersal barriers posed by roads   UCP – Avoid developing new roads that bisect toad habitat (3.7.1.b)  Main roads beyond scope of this document. See P49 for temporary roads. UCP3.7.2 Minimize habitat impacts due to roads   UCP - Direct runoff away from breeding habitat (3.7.2.a)  Main roads beyond scope of this document. See P49 for temporary roads.     UCP – Buffer 150m between new dirt road and breeding sites (3.7.2.b)  Primary concern is in Barney Lake HUC in Alternatives 4 and 5     UCP – Buffer 1km between new paved road and  Not relevant to this project breeding sites (3.7.2.c)  P52 Some grey literature indicates FNF grazing standards may be inadequate. Other literature inconclusive, needs further study. UCP3.3.1 100-330 foot vegetation for shade and chemical trapping  P56    Chemical Use Reduce chemical use near amphibian habitat Identify pesticide presence, eliminate or reduce impacts Avoid chemicals in riparian areas General/Miscellaneous Avoid practices that result in sedimentation and slumping M. Smith developed a map of soil suitability for fire treatments on Monroe Mountain Avoid construction and habitat altering during months when amphibians are concentrated and vulnerable. P63 P64 Reduce/remove impermeable surfaces near wetlands  P65  PARC Alternative 2     P1 No impact No change from current conditions No impact Design features include measures for this HMG No change from current conditions Consider a mix of protective measures, such as differing buffer widths, limited and no-entry P10 Part of the purpose and need of the project No impact No impact Retain large wood in riparian and streams/rivers P16 FNF Plan has S&G for % fines to maintain substrate size P18 Manage activities and ground disturbance in and near riparian areas No impact  UCP3.8.1 Protect habitats in forest stands adjacent to and within 2.5 miles (4km) of breeding sites When feasible harvest timber during amphibian inactive seasons Not fully consistent. Main roads already open to all traffic. Temporary roads in RHCAs would not be used until after 10/1, however, unless surveys indicated use not likely to be a problem. No change from current conditions P34 Retain large trees and snags for future downed wood recruitment No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG P35 Minimize logging on steep slopes [Note: GIS averages slope, can allow harvest on local slopes > 40%. Most N. Forests limit harvest to slopes <35%] No change from current conditions Harvest limited to 40% slopes or less.  C:\Users\asolt\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\ZO3J3A7U\Monroe_EIS_Proposed_Fencing_Map.jpgP50 Install arch culverts and tunnels in roadways. Replace old/failed culverts with passage friendly structures - UCP – Install culverts and bridges to allow for natural riparian zones and stream flows (3.7.1.a) slightly to reduce areas of concern. additional road construction in Barney and Manning Res. and upper Manning HUCs. in the Manning Res. and upper Manning HUCs. vulnerable. P63 Minimize soil disturbance when using heavy equipment near amphibian and reptile habitat No impact All action alternatives have a design feature with no mechanized equipment near streams and breeding sites P64 Reduce/remove impermeable surfaces near wetlands No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG for timber harvest.  MC – Barney Lake Appendix G  Boreal Toad Habitat Impact Tables Table G-1: Boreal Toad Habitat by Subwatershed HUC Name HUCtype Subwatershed Size - Acres Mapped Boreal Toad Habitat - Acres USDA LOGO7 Percentage of HUC in Boreal Toad Habitat Dry Creek – Upper Mod 6 http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif283 901 9.5% Manning Cr – Upper Mod 6- 14,855 1,044 7.0% Table G-2: Percentage of Boreal Toad Habitat proposed for Treatment by Subwatershed (created by using GIS to overlay project areas (summarized in Table 8) and mapped boreal toad habitat). HUC Name Subwatershed Size - Acres BT Habitat Acres Acres and Percent proposed for treatment Acres mechanical/Acres fire (60% factored in) Total acres/% of BT habitat    Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper 9,510 901 49/46 95 – 10.5% 174/53 227 – 25.2% 265/53 318 – 35.3% 77/27 104 – 11.5% Manning Cr – Upper 14,855 1,044 68/209 277 – 26.5% 124/235 359 – 34.4% 212/205 417 – 39.9% 207/125 332 – 31.8% MC – Barney Lake 283 174 0/72 72 – 41.4% HUC Name BT Habitat Acres (Sq. miles) Motorized Trail Miles in BT Habitat (Density) Temp Road Miles in BT Habitat Alternative with Temp Roads 901 (1.408) 7.4 (5.26) 5.62/5.62 0% Manning Cr – Upper 14,855 2.52 (1.55) .64 (.39) 0% 4 283 174 .61 (2.24) .68 (2.5) 93% MC – ManningRes (USDA Forest Appendix H  ERA Model Description and Spreadsheet Analysis Summarization  The equivalent roaded area (ERA) model has been USDA LOGOService 1988 used to analyze direct, indirect, and cumulat ive effects of projects http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif) As part of the aquatics analysis for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project, t he effects of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future impacts were assessed using the Region Five Cumulative Off - site Watershed Effects Analy sis  Sanitation and Salvage 0.2 20 Timber Harvest 0.35 20 Dixie Harrow 0.25 10** *This would be for very low severity prescribed fires, such as prescribed burning ponderosa pine to remove needle accumulations and young tree recruitment. **Shorter 10-year time period used for recovery as impacts lower than those with 20-year recovery period.  ERA Values were summed up for each analyses watershed. The ERA totals were then divided by the total acreage of each watershed to obtain the ERA percentage for the entire watershed, rounded to the nearest tenth of a percent (0.1%).  The HUCs are the same used in the cumulative effects writeup for the main report. For most of the drainages these are a modified HUC6. Many of the official 6th field HUCs include lower valley lands along the Sevier River off Forest. Many of these lower drainages are dry, due to diversions near the mouth of the canyon/near the Forest boundary. Thus the HUC boundaries were redrawn using the Stream Stats web page to a pour point at one of the following – mouth of the canyon, diversion point, or end of the fish population. In general, these potential pour points are located in close proximity or overlap. This ensures the entire fish supporting habitat is analyzed, but effects are not misrepresented by including irrelevant lands downstream of the aquatic resources.  In addition to the 6th field HUCs, smaller subwatersheds at the 7th or 8th field level were delineated that contain the important lakes and reservoirs on Monroe Mountain. These lakes are valuable for sensitive fish species, boreal toad habitat, and recreational fishing. Water quality is a concern with all of these lakes. These smaller subwatersheds were defined using the Stream Stats web page to a pour point at the reservoir outlet, ensuring all of the contributing watershed area above the reservoir was analyzed. To simplify GIS analysis, these sub-watersheds were carved out of the larger HUC6 so analysis could be run using one layer and one run. For the major fish supporting drainages (Manning Creek, Monroe Creek, and Box Creek), these multiple fields were recombined in the supporting spreadsheets for the final overall modified 6th field coverage. Table H-4 shows the relative HUC level for each subwatershed analyzed.  For the cumulative effects analyses, calculations for disturbances were made for system roads (modeled width 20 feet), motorized trails (width 5 feet), past wildfires or prescribed fires (for the draft analysis past fire severities were assumed as described in the spreadsheet – generally a 50:50 mix of moderate and high severity but in some cases only moderate severity for small fires, etc.), past timber harvests, and past Dixie Harrow projects. These existing impacts are included in the No Action sheet in the supporting spreadsheets for the modeled HUCs to give a baseline disturbance level from past and ongoing activities. These existing impacts are also included in the action alternative analyses, which include the proposed actions for each action alternative.  For grazing the model uses a 0.01 disturbance coefficient for all upland grazed acres. For riparian zones, 100 feet on each side of the stream where livestock graze is delineated and these acres are given a disturbance coefficient of 0.7. This method reflects the greater sensitivity to disturbance along streams than in the upland areas. The stream distances were developed by GIS analysis by  Determinations of Threshold of Concern (TOC) . High relief ratio throughout the watersheds (long steep slopes) . Drainages are prone to high intensity precipitation events . Extensive bank erosion . Within watershed and/or downstream T/E/S aquatic species . Within watershed and/or downstream important aquatic species use including high value trout fisheries . Downstream use includes irrigation, water storage structures, and other property  It should be noted, however, that there is a concern by this author that the TOC values given in Table H-2, which are adapted from Haraden (2013), are too high. Haraden (2013) calculated an ERA for the Shingle Creek watershed in 2013 of 15.5% after the Twitchell Canyon fire (Haraden’s modeling did not include riparian grazing which would have increased this value slightly). In 2014, with one more year of fire recovery, continued watershed instability means that Shingle Creek is still unable to support trout for extended time periods. Table H-2 has not been adjusted, as this author has no data or information specific to the Fishlake N.F., to make these changes. The TOC values in the table should be used with caution until greater use of the ERA model and associated project monitoring has vetted these numbers or provided the information to make appropriate changes. This concern is the reason for selecting the lower end of the range given in Table H-2 for the TOC value specified in Table H-3.  Table H-2: Sensitivity Categories and Corresponding TOC for Sub-watersheds Sensitivity  TOC (%)  Very Low Project Area MapImportant BT habitat Dry Can – Hunts Lk High MonroeCrcombined Mod6 11 1.0 8.7 10.9 12.5 10.6 Greenwich* 11922 1788 Alt 4 11.6 11.0 10.3 Box Cr (combined) 19684 2953 Alt 4 13.6 assumes the disturbance will be the same as if the same acreage burned on a steep slope just above a stream.  For the purpose of this ERA modeling exercise, the proposed fire treatment acres were modeled as a 50:50 mix of moderate and high fire severity. The proposed action describes targeting treatments for light to moderate fire severities. The difference between the proposed and modeled fire severities was made with the following considerations.  BAER mapping of fires in southern Utah over the last 10-15 years shows that commonly about 1/3 of the fire is unburned to low severity, 1/3 of the fire is moderate severity, and 1/3 of the fire is high severity (for example, the Twitchell Canyon fire in 2010, which burned for 119 days and under a variety of burning conditions/fuels, approximated this fire severity ratio). In addition, low fire severity is commonly mapped with unburned areas. There is a project design feature of leaving 40% of the target areas untreated. So an assumption was made for modeling that low fire severity areas could be lumped in with unburned. Under this assumption, treatments could be somewhat more aggressive and include larger total burned/treated acres, since the low fire severity would be counting as untreated.  As we are often reminded of (by both nature and fire experts), fire is an imprecise tool. Thus while the design feature is to seek low to moderate severities to minimize fire effects to other resources, it is plausible that in some (not all) cases the resulting fire severities will be a higher mix of fire severities than planned. While the modeled severities are higher than planned, existing fire severity mapping show that the modeled severities are plausible outcomes for some treatments in some watersheds. A design feature common to all action alternatives is that riparian habitats will be treated after adjacent uplands have been treated and recovered. This design feature will separate the riparian treatment areas (which are relatively small – generally <1.5% of the watershed on the Fishlake N.F.) impacts in time, slightly reducing the peak actual ERA vs the modeled ERA. In addition, the separation of treatments will help reduce sedimentation, reducing the actual on-the-ground impacts from the modeled levels. For the purpose of modeling it was assumed that all proposed treatments occur at one time in year one. It is quite possible and even likely that for logistical reasons within a specific watershed the prescribed burning may take place in a different year than the mechanical treatments, that different forms of mechanical treatments may take place in different years (conifer removal from aspen vs. timber harvest), and that even mechanical treatment, such as commercial timber harvest, may occur over 2 or more years. Given the objective that large areas are to be treated within a short timeframe to minimize impacts from grazers on aspen reproduction, however, it is a reasonable assumption that the treatments would generally occur within a short timeframe. For modeling ease and consistency, however, it was assumed that the treatments occurred concurrently and in implementation year one within each HUC. A design feature has been added for the modified HUC6 subwatersheds to run a future HUC specific run of the ERA model just before implementation is planned to incorporate actual conditions for past project recovery times, actual acres and types of mechanical treatment, planned HUC treatment timing, etc. Summary of Modeling Considerations  To conduct a watershed modeling exercise like this over an entire mountain, with nearly 50,000 acres of proposed treatment area spread across the 175,000 acres within the Monroe Mountain administrative boundary, it is necessary to make assumptions. These assumptions have been clearly stated above. It is necessary to be consistent across the areas and alternatives modeled when making these assumptions and modeling decisions. This ERA modeling exercise was undertaken to determine what a likely cumulative level of impacts could occur at the watershed scale for each alternative. The results should be considered a potential upper level of impacts if design features are followed, which can then be compared to suggested thresholds of concern to help guide management and implementation decisions that weight the benefits of the proposed action to the targeted vegetation communities to the potential risks to watershed function and aquatic resources.  Actual levels of impacts that occur during implementation are likely to be somewhat lower (due to implementation being spread over time, achieving design objectives of low to moderate fire severities, and including low fire severities as part of the 60% treatment area) if the project is implemented as designed. In some cases impacts could be moderately lower than modeled. While the modeled results are likely the upper end of what could occur, since all factors were consistent between alternatives, the relative ranking of the alternatives can be used to help differentiate between them.  References for Appendix H (references included in aquatic reference folder for main report)  Berg, N.H., Roby, K.B., and McGurk, B.J., 1996. Cumulative Watershed Effects: Applicability  of Available Methodologies to the Sierra Nevada . I n Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Final Report to Congress, Vol. III ,  Assessments, Commissioned Reports, and Background Information , Chapter 2 . Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, University of Cal ifornia, Davis, CA .   Haraden, P. 2013. Twitchell Fire Salvage Sale :  Hydrology Report. Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, UT. 24pp.   McGurk , B.J.  and D.R. Fong, 1995. Equivalent Roaded Area as a Measure of Cumulative  Effect of Logging.  Environmental Management 19(4): 609 - 621 .   Menning, K. M., D.C. Erman , K.N. Johnson, and  J. Sessions .  1996. Modeling Aquatic and Riparian Systems, Assessing Cumulative Watershed Effects, and Limiting Watershed Disturbance . P 33 - 51 in Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project: Fin al Report to Congress, Addendum. Davis: University of California, Centers for Water and Wildland Resources, 1996.   USDA Forest Service.  1988 . Cumula tive Off - site Effects Analysis Interim Directive No. 1. ,  Soil and Water Conservation Han dbook FSH 2509.22, chapter 20. Appendix I  Stream Stability from Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II  Pfankuch Scores Adjusted for Rosgen Channel Type  From 2002 to 2006 the Fishlake N.F. conducted Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II monitoring on 495 miles of Forest streams (contracted), including 48 miles of streams on Monroe Mountain (Petty 2006a, Petty 2006b, and Petty 2004). Under this methodology, a Pfankuch stream stability worksheet is filled out for each delineated and surveyed stream reach. The Pfankuch method returns a score, with lower numbers indicating greater stability and higher numbers lower stability. For this analysis, the original data spreadsheets were modified and Pfankuch scores from the above cited surveys were classified for each stream reach as Good, Fair, or Poor based on Rosgen stream channel type, as shown in Table 6-7 in Applied River Morphology (Rosgen 1996: p 6-29 to 6-30). The overall stream stability lengths in each classification were then summarized by stream name into the tables in this Appendix I.  Table I-1: Stream stability ratings for all surveyed streams on Monroe Mountain and overall percentage.     Table I-2: Stream stability ratings for Manning Creek HUC6 (adjusted w/ upper reservoirs).   Table I-3: Stream stability ratings for Koosharem Creek HUC6 (adjusted).   Table I-4: Stream stability ratings for Greenwich Creek HUC6 (adjusted).    Length Percentage Stream Miles Feet Good Fair Poor Good Fair Poor Manning Creek 7.36 38865 29685 2901 6279 76.4 7.5 16.2 East Fork Manning Cr 0.6 3151 3151 0 0 100 0 0 Barney Creek 1.37 7220 7220 0 0 100 0 0 Collins Creek 1.52 8047 8047 0 0 100 0 0 Vale Creek 1.42 7522 7522 0 0 100 0 0 Straight Canyon 2.37 12511 4299 8212 0 34.4 65.6 0 Totals 14.64 77316 59924 11113 6279 Overall Percentage 77.5 14.4 8.1 Length Percentage Stream Miles Feet Good Fair Poor Good Fair Poor Koosharem Creek 5.08 26800 23067 2245 1488 86.1 8.4 5.6 Totals 5.08 26800 23067 2245 1488 Overall Percentage 86.1 8.4 5.6 Length Percentage Stream Miles Feet Good Fair Poor Good Fair Poor Greenwich Creek 4.04 21349 21349 0 0 100 0 0 South Fork Greenwich Cr 3.94 20804 14926 1096 4782 71.7 5.3 23 Trib 1 South Fork Greenwich C2r.07 10929 4031 0 6898 36.9 0 63.1 Trib Trib 1 SF Greenwich Cr 1.18 6212 3287 1456 1469 52.9 23.4 23.6 Trib 2 Greenwich Creek 0.54 2874 1923 0 951 66.9 0 33.1 Thurber Creek 3.32 17516 0 2447 15069 0 14 86 Totals 15.09 79684 45516 4999 29169 Overall Percentage 57.1 6.3 36.6  Length Percentage Stream Miles Feet Good Fair Poor Good Fair Poor Box Creek (inc S Fork) 8.44 44586 25464 8014 11108 57.1 18 24.9 North Fork Box Creek 3.61 19082 9797 7714 1571 51.3 40.4 8.2 Trib 1 North Fork Box Cr 1.46 7725 3437 1021 3267 44.5 13.2 42.3 Totals 13.51 71393 38698 16749 15946 Overall Percentage 54.2 23.5 22.3  Appendix J  Due to the nature of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration Project - that treats habitat across the majority of the mountain within or adjacent to boreal toad habitat, treats areas that may affect boreal toad habitat from downstream effects, the recent introduction of chytrid fungus to Monroe Mountain and the likely concurrent boreal toad population decline, and the fact that boreal toads have been petitioned for listing as a threatened species with a status review scheduled to be completed by 2017- active monitoring of boreal toads before, during, and after project implementation is required to determine that project design features work as intended and are effective, the project is implemented as designed, and that site specific findings of toad use areas, timing, etc. can be incorporated into implementation actions. This monitoring is described in the FEIS design features section as part of the proposed action for all action alternatives. This monitoring will ensure that boreal toad impacts are minimized and of a scale that ensures the project will not lead towards federal listing.  The following is a monitoring proposal designed to meet the need described above. The actual monitoring plan should be developed through interagency coordination with interagency implementation and may vary somewhat from this plan but should be of a similar scale and address the following objectives, AIS control measures, and annual review and reporting requirements.  Boreal Toad Distribution:  USDA LOGO . Objective: Determine changes in distribution of boreal toads across Monroe Mountain and find changes in use greater than 10% of the area.  Action: Continue yearly distribution monitoring/egg mass counts combined with eDNA use in areas where toads are suspected but have not been recently documented.   Action: Complete distribution surveys of all potential habitat before project work begins in an area. Consider eDNA use in areas where toads are suspected but have not been documented.  Disease Concerns  . Objective: Determine change in chytrid fungus distribution during project implementation.  Action: Continue yearly chytrid fungus monitoring (Multiple swabs/year from each major drainage and/or breeding site including swabs taken as part of work below)   Boreal Toad Habitat Use/Habitat Concerns  . Objective: Determine key boreal toad use areas (all major breeding sites/majority of hibernacula) prior to treatment.  . Objective: Determine BT preference for habitat types in treatment areas prior to treatment and post-treatment.  . Objective: Find additional boreal toad habitat use areas in hard to locate postbreeding habitat.  Action: Radio tracking study (see Browne and Paszkowski 2014 for example of field work methodology)  3 zones - Dry Creek; Manning, Greenwich, Koosharem, and Monroe; Deep Lake and Big Lake  Conduct a minimum of one year before vegetation treatment implementation  Conduct a minimum of one year of tracking during project implementation. If implementation occurs over several years consider the following factors to determine which year to monitor or if more than one year is necessary: early monitoring could identify toad concerns early in the implementation process, monitoring the year of maximal disturbance would be beneficial, monitoring might be based on the relative concern of the treatment types (i.e. fire vs. timber harvest).   Conduct a minimum of one year of tracking post-project implementation  Monitoring plan elements   Summer radios only  Test each radio-tagged toad for chytrid at start of field season and end when radio removed  Tygon/fishing leader belt or Velcro harness (established techniques)  Belts will be adjusted as necessary and any wounds treated with disinfectant. If necessary the belt may be removed and the radio shifted to another toad.   Boreal Toad Population / Survival Rate Concerns . Objective: Determine boreal toad survival rates Action: Conduct “Bio-blitz” type capture/recapture study events at key breeding sites throughout the Monroe Mountain project area yearly (see Thompson et al. 2014 for example and details). Note: Due to the nature of the proposed action, it is not possible to have a control area for the entire project duration (ideal would be a chytrid positive and chytrid negative control area to compare to the treatment zone). By using BAC type study and the nature of the proposed action generally being implemented across three different broad zones, it is believed that major factors can be learned using the above study design. Workers have minimum of 2 easily cleaned (rubber soled) pair of boots/waders to allow changing between drainages. The pair of boots not being used will be scrubbed and sprayed or soaked in a Quat solution between drainages. After radio tagging the toad it will not be normally handled (unless needed for additional study objectives such as weight) unless the radio needs adjusting or for end of season radio removal.  After toad has been PIT tagged it will not normally be handled except as necessary for PIT tag reading and in a new field season for length/weight measurements. Scale and ruler will be disinfected between toads.  Yearly post-monitoring meeting  Prepare an annual monitoring report describing work actions, documenting toad locations, dates, habitats and other findings, along with any issues, preliminary findings, areas needing further study in future years, or areas considered fully addressed and not needing further study. Yearly reports will be generally completed in time for any annual boreal toad conservation team meetings, but no later than December 31st of the calendar year.  Conduct project implementation monitoring as well as any monitoring associated with boreal toad design feature exemptions (see documentation sheet in Appendix M).  Share boreal toad monitoring results with the Monroe Mountain Aspen implementation team/Richfield R.D. personnel yearly. Share observations on Monroe Mountain project design feature implementation successes, problems, areas needing additional treatments, etc. to reduce/eliminate impacts to boreal toads/habitat  Determine monitoring successes and issues. Discontinue monitoring project if problems such as high mortality are seen from monitoring project actions.  Complete a final monitoring report after the post-implementation monitoring is finished.   Appendix K-2  Alternative Synthesis HUC Tables     Tables K-2: Individual HUC Summary Tables (a through o unlabeled) USDA LOGO   HUC Name http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif No Act Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5     MC- Barney Lake     Hydrologist Report 1 5 4 2 3  S UT Empirical Fire Data 0 5 5 6 6  ERA Modeling 1 2 3 5 6  Spatial Review 1 2 3 4 5  PARC HMG Consistency 2 4 4 5 5  BT Habitat Impacts 2 4 4 5 Hydrologist Report 3 2 3 4 ERA Modeling 3 5 Spatial Review 1 5 3 2 3 3 1 3 3 BT Road Impacts 1 TC - Anabella Res Hydrologist Report 1 4 3 2 3  S UT Empirical Fire Data 0 4 5 6 5  ERA Modeling Project Area MapHydrologist Report Koosharem Creek Box Creek below Res Hydrologist Report 1 3 4 2 5  S UT Empirical Fire Data Appendix L  Table L-1: Boreal Toad Key Habitat by HUC HUC 6  USDA LOGOBoreal Toad Key Habitat Area  http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gifAcres  Box Creek - Above Reservoirs Inside Key Habitat Area 2,089 Outside Habitat Area 6,380 Manning Creek -  Manning Reservoir Total  1,189  Manning Creek - Upper Inside Key Habitat Area 1,044 Outside Habitat Area 13,812 Manning Creek -  Upper Total  14,855  Maple Creek-Sevier River Outside Habitat Area 28,346 Maple Creek - Sevier River Total  28,346 Mileage of Routes by HUC 6 Box Creek - Above Reservoirs Road Temporary Road 1.39 Box Creek Above Reservoirs Total 31.94 Motorized Trail 13.30 Road Temporary Road Monroe Creek Total  23.48  Thompson Creek-Sevier River - Annabella Reservoir Motorized Trail 0.21 Road 1.48 Project Area MapMileage Inside Key Boreal Toad Habitat Table L-3: Road and Trail Mileage Within Key Boreal Toad Habitat by HUC Thompson Creek - Sevier River -  Annabella Reservoir Total   Table L-4: Past Fire Acres by HUC Past Fire History 1994 - 2014 Outside Treatment Areas Fire Name  Fire Year  Gold Creek-Sevier River 6 Manning Creek - Manning Reservoir 88 Dry Canyon 196 1979 Monroe Creek (blank) 41 1996 Pine Canyon-Otter Creek 433 (blank) 2009 Pine Canyon-Otter Creek 1,326 Manning Creek - Manning Reservoir 0 1983  Acres 085 Road 2000 Greenwich Creek 22 Annabella Harvest 2001 Thompson Creek-Sevier River 1 Annabella Aspen 3 Harvest 2005 Mill Creek 0 Water Creek - Big Lake 21 Bagley North Dixie Harrow 1997 Greenwich Creek 10 Koosharem Creek-Otter Creek 28 Bell Rock Dixie Harrow 1996 Water Creek 135 Big Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 Box Creek - Below Reservoirs 6 Manning Creek - Upper 125 Big Flat Aspen Units 4,5 & 6 Mill Creek 58 Thompson Creek-Sevier River 355 (blank) 1,273 Clover Flat Harvest 1989 Water Creek 0 Water Creek - Big Lake 1 Cove Mtn Salvage II Harvest 1996 Mill Creek 15 Water Creek - Big Lake 1 Cove Mtn. Salvage Harvest 1993 Mill Creek 9 Doe Flat Clear Cut 1992 Mill Creek 14 Dry Creek Dixie Harrow 2004 Dry Creek - Upper 41 Manning Creek - Upper 50 Dry Creek--State Clear Cut 1999 Dry Creek - Upper 14 Dry Lake Harvest 1993 Dry Creek - Upper 3 Durkee Fuels Brushsaw 2004 Gold Creek-Sevier River 41 Manning Creek - Upper 575 Durkee Springs Dixie Harrow 2004 Manning Creek - Upper 466 Forshea Clear Cut 1998 Pole Canyon-Otter Creek 106 (blank) 5 Forshea Mountain Dixie Harrow 1999 Pole Canyon-Otter Creek 65 (blank) 8 Hells Hole Dixie Harrow Mill #11a Harvest 2003 Mill Creek 56 Mill #8 Salvage Harvest 1999 Mill Creek 8 Mill #9 Salvage Harvest 2000 Mill Creek 1 Monroe Creek 0 Water Creek - Big Lake 44 Mill 12 Planting 2004 Water Creek - Big Lake 51 Mill Creek Harvest 2000 Mill Creek 60 Water Creek - Big Lake 199 Monroe Peak Harvest 1980 Monroe Creek 1 Monument Peak Salvage Harvest 1998 Mill Creek 7 Monument Peak Salvage II Harvest 1999 Mill Creek 53 North Clover Harvest 2007 Water Creek - Big Lake 1 (blank) 2007 Water Creek - Big Lake 3 Pole Canyon HA 1982 Pole Canyon-Otter Creek 19 Research Unit Clear Cut 1998 Manning Creek - Upper  Appendix M  For proposed design feature exceptions for the following - treatment or direct fire ignition within 100 feet of streams, ponds, lakes and wetlands in RHCAs, treatment or direct fire ignition within 328 feet of a boreal toad breeding site or hibernacula, treatment within 100 feet of unmapped perennial water bodies in boreal toad supporting habitat, burning of slash piles within RHCAs that are not on upland ground [note – no pile burning within 100 feet of streams, ponds, lakes, wetlands, breeding sites, and hibernacula], and burning of slash piles within RHCAs outside of the boreal toad dormant season (October 1 thru April 15). Attach additional information, maps, emails, reports, or citations as needed.  General description/location of proposed area of design feature exception:    USDA LOGO Attach topo map, sketch map, or Google Earth image with exception area delineated below:    http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif       List rationale for exception (How does the work improve boreal toad habitat or reduce fire risk to boreal toad habitat? List any supporting information such as requests for treatments, support, or concurrence from UDWR aquatic biologists or the Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Team.):         Necessary post-implementation monitoring:       Approved by:   __________________________ ______________ Forest Fisheries Biologist Date   Summary of project implementation actions:          Summary of implementation and post-implementation monitoring:         Approved by:   __________________________ ______________ Forest Fisheries Biologist Date Appendix I – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Fire Ecology/Fire/Fuels Specialist Report (Chappell et al. 2015)    Prepared by: Wess Freeborn Linda M. Chappell Fuels Specialist Fire Ecologist   Scott Tobler Stanley G. Kitchen Fire Planner Research Botanist   Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings ( ). Project Area Map Figure 1: Vicinity Map of Project Area Of these 175,706 acres, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres on Monroe Mountain ( Figure 2 ). Soil survey information was used to estimate the historic occurrence of aspen. It is widely recognized that aspen ecosystems are capable of supporting one of the largest arrays of plant and animal species due to its high productivity and structural diversity. However, it is also widely recognized that aspen ecosystems have been in decline throughout the Intermountain West during the twentieth century (UFRWG 2010). On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to, 1. Conifer encroachment due to a reduced occurrence of wildland fire because of an increase in wildland fire suppression; and, western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e., 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. Mechanical treatments can also be an effective disturbance tool for aspen restoration. Aspen-mixed conifer communities on Monroe Mountain developed with fire as a historical disturbance process. Published multi-century fire histories for Monroe Mountain and five regional landscapes with similar topography and vegetation reveal patterns of abundant fire prior to Euro-American settlement in the mid to late-1800s (Heyerdahl et al. 2011). For four sites, stand demographics, surface fire frequency, and fire severity were characterized for plots arranged in grids to represent a broad range in elevation and vegetation type within small watersheds. Aspen was found in 62 percent (59 of 95) of the study plots. Of these, 53 percent were classified in low to mixed severity fire classes with short to moderate fire-free intervals while the remaining plots were classified as having high fire severity and assumed longer intervals. Fire-scarred ponderosa pine trees (Pinus ponderosa) sampled on Old Woman Plateau revealed a consistent pattern of frequent surface fire from the 1500s to the late 1800s. This site is located approximately 40 miles northeast of Monroe Mountain and like much of the eastcentral and southern portions of Monroe Mountain is characterized by gentle terrain with small stands of aspen separated by openings of mostly non-forested sagebrush steppe. Reported fire evidence from Monroe Mountain was limited to 10 fire-scarred ponderosa pine trees sampled from across a large portion of the mountain. Although ponderosa pine is an excellent species for preserving long records of surface fire, it is an uncommon species on Monroe Mountain and as such is not sufficiently abundant to drive fuels and fire dynamics. However, the short to moderate fire frequency evident from the sampled trees ( Figure 3 ) is supported by widespread evidence of past fire in the form of fireinjured Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and Engelmann spruce trees (Picea engelmannii; including multiple injuries per tree; ( Figure 4  2 A stable aspen community has a predominantly aspen overstory with little to no conifer regeneration.  conditions. In mixed stands, aspen cover and viability decreased due to the lack of disturbance over the past 150 plus years. Although persistent or stable 2     Figure 4: Fire-scarred Engelmann spruce, with evidence of three separate fires near Monkey Flat Ridge, Monroe Mountain (photo credit Stan Kitchen).  Figure 3: Chronologies of surface fires at Monroe Mountain, sampled over an approximately 35-mile north south transect. Each horizontal line indicates the length of record for a single tree. The short vertical lines indicate years when that tree had a fire scar. Recorder years (solid lines) generally follow the first scar on each tree. Non-recorder years (dashed lines) precede the formation of the first scar on each tree, but also occur when a period of the fire record was consumed by subsequent fires or decay. Inner and outer dates are the dates of the earliest or latest rings sampled for trees where pith or bark was not sampled (Heyerdahl et al. 2011). Ecosystem Management on Monroe Mountain The Fishlake National Forest is uniquely suited to apply ecosystem management principles on the Monroe Mountain watersheds. There are large amounts of published research contributing to local knowledge of the resources interacting on the mountain. The information includes fire history studies, soils characteristics studies, elk and deer use studies, aspen studies, rangeland use, etc. These have been ongoing over the last decades and provide strong support, background and perspective on what is possible in these important watersheds. In an interview with the National Fire Protection Association in 2011, noted Fire Historian Stephen Pyne summarized it well, “Fire has a lot of other ecological effects besides consuming surplus fuel. It’s a biochemical reaction-it releases nutrients and it rearranges things. That’s why fire and logging are not equivalent operations. Logging takes the big stuff and leaves the little. Fire burns the little and leaves the big. One doesn’t substitute for the other. It’s the whole sense that these landscapes are now out of sync…” (Pyne, S. 2011). The Fishlake National Forest is striving to enhance restore the structure, function and composition of aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain so that they are fully functioning disturbance based ecosystems.   1. Firefighter and public safety is the first priority in every fire management activity. The wildland fire management environment is complex and possesses inherent hazards that can---even with reasonable mitigation---result in harm. In recognition of this fact, we are committed to the aggressive management of risk. 1. Identify and use fire ecology to frame land and resource management objectives. 4. Manage the land to make it more resilient to disturbance, in accordance with management objectives. 5142 - PRESCRIBED FIRE 2. The NWCG Interagency Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation Procedures Guide - PMS 484, is Forest Service policy (incorporated by reference at: http://www.nwcg.gov/pms/RxFire/rxfireguide.pdf ). (FSM 5142, Page 8) 1. Administrative sites; 2. Developed recreation sites; 3. Summer home sites; 4. Designated communication sites; 7. Above-ground utility corridors; and, Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property Prescribed fire activities may result in impacts to private property. Current fuel loads in areas adjacent to private properties generally do not allow prescribed fire activities to be managed safely with low risk of affecting private property. The reduced occurrence of wildland fire due to an increase in wildland fire suppression has contributed to the increased fuel loads over most of Monroe Mountain, including areas adjacent to private property. The method of analysis is primarily fire behavior modeling to predict the behavior of a fire in the project area for the vegetation conditions that would exist under the No-action and range of proposed alternatives. Fire behavior model inputs were obtained from a combination of historical weather records and the weather prescription used during implementation of the Box Creek broadcast prescribed fire in late spring of 2012. Forest Vegetation Simulator outputs from stand exam data were used to inform fuel model and canopy characteristics choices. Since it can be difficult to demonstrate differences among alternatives using just a single fire behavior indicator, such as flame length or spotting, an index combining the flame length, spotting distance and crown/surface fire activity outputs was created. This index displays combined fire behavior differences among the no action and action alternatives proposed in this project. The issue of fire impacting private lands necessitated a focus on fire behavior in and adjacent to the mechanical treatments beside the private lands, both after the mechanical treatments occur and once the project is completed. A distance filter from private land boundaries was applied to differentiate among the four action alternatives when compared to the no action alternative.  Figure 5: Current Dominant Vegetation and Treatment Area Priorities   Environmental Indicators The environmental indicators listed below were selected by a sub-group of fire/fuels/modeling specialists. These indicators were determined to be the critical indicators that are relevant for decision making. • Firefighter and Public Safety • Flame Length (FL) The surface fire characteristics chart includes curves for several flame length values as related to rate of spread and heat per unit area ( Figure 6 ) with symbols for fire suppression interpretations ranging from fires that can be attacked by firefighters with hand tools to fires for which control efforts are ineffective (Andrews, et.al, 2011)  Figure 6: A fire behavior characteristics chart illustrates two primary characteristics of fire behavior – spread rate and intensity. Figures on the chart are an indication of fire suppression effectiveness related to flame length. (Andrews, et. al. 2011) Indicators listed above are primarily short term indicators to address Issue 2; prescribed fire may impact private property. The long term indicator chosen to show the health of aspen ecosystem is Properly Functioning Condition, utilizing the Region 4 process shown in Appendix PFC. Properly Functioning Condition: Ecosystems at any temporal or spatial scale are in a properly functioning condition when they are dynamic and resilient to perturbations to structure, composition, and processes of their biological or physical components. The assessment utilized here was completed initially in 1998, as part of the then developed ‘Prescribed Natural Fire Plan’, updated in 2000 in the Fishlake National Forest Plan Amendment (Jackson, et.al, 1998). Indicators are fire return interval and acres disturbed by ecosystem cover type. Overview of the Proposed Action Proposed Mechanical Treatments Seral and Stable Aspen Stands There are two mechanical treatment options being considered in this analysis for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photos 1 to 9; Appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photos 2, 5, and 8; Appendix A; Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods There are also two mechanical treatments options being considered in this analysis for spruce/fir and mixed dominated conifer stands (Photos 10 thru 18; Appendix A):  Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Existing Vegetation Proposed Prescribed Fire Treatments Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. To maintain LRMP compliance, prescribed fire would occur when 60 percent of the area would be expected to burn ( Table 4 ).  Existing Vegetation Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 15,159 Design Criteria and Mitigation Measures Design criteria are described in detail in chapter 2 of the EIS. See chapter 2 for additional information. Monitoring Burn Monitoring Direct fire effects would be monitored as required in each burn plan. These are primarily the direct effects of the burn itself: daily weather, smoke, acres burned, flame length, rate of spread. Each burn plan will spell out precisely what is required and who will perform the monitoring. Browse Thresholds and Response Options  The Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG) submitted to the Fishlake National Forest a document titled Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain (MMWG 2014). The MMWG recommended this document for inclusion and analysis in the EIS. The Forest has reviewed this document and is proposing to adopt the browse thresholds and response options recommended by the MMWG. The document in its entirety is located in Appendix D and is hereby incorporated by reference. The UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board have reviewed and support this document. Chapter 2 of the EIS includes a summary of the browse thresholds and response options.  Manning Meadows and Barney Lake Fencing  Regardless of which alternative is selected, treatment areas adjacent to Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake would be fenced to exclude both wildlife and livestock browsing (Figure 7). With fencing, the amount of time needed to acquire a minimum of 1,000 aspen saplings per acre is expected to be quicker. Other vegetation and cover types are also expected to benefit from fencing.  The District is proposing to construct approximately 7.2 miles (633 acres) of temporary fence in the Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake areas (Figure 7). This fence would be approximately 8 feet tall and constructed with net wire, t-post, and wooden post. Maintenance of the temporary fence would occur for 4 to 6 years until the aspen shoots are greater than 6 feet tall, after which the fence would be removed.      Figure 7: Proposed fencing near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake Affected Environment – Existing Condition 1. Background and history of the Monroe Mountain area 2. Fire history and ecology 3. Recent fire occurrence 1. Background and history of the Monroe Mountain area Why the concern about loss of aspen ecosystems? Aspen are considered a keystone ecosystem in central Utah. “Quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) are unique because, in contrast to most western forest trees, they reproduce primarily by suckering from the parent root system. Generally, disturbance or dieback is necessary to stimulate regeneration of aspen stands. These self-regenerating stands have existed for thousands of years. If they are lost from the landscape, they will not return through normal seeding processes as do other tree species.” (Bartos and Campbell, 1998). This loss of aspen ecosystems then leads to loss of ecosystem sustainability and overall ecosystem biodiversity in direct opposition to the Fishlake Forest Plan direction to sustain biodiversity (Fishlake LRMP. 1986). Aspen historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain and a number of papers have been published utilizing data collected, summarized and analyzed from the Monroe Mountain area.               Figure 8: Information gathered through fire histories and from interpretation and analysis of the Soil Resource Inventory indicates that with no change in the prevailing conditions most aspen stands within the Project Area will eventually be replaced by conifer. “Loss, or potential loss, of aspen dominated stands on these lands can be attributed primarily to a combination of successional processes, reduction (or elimination) of fire, and long-term overuse by ungulates.            Existing conditions indicate that most aspen stands will eventually be replaced by conifers, sagebrush or possibly other shrub communities. The decline of aspen results in reduced water yield, forage, and biodiversity. Numerous landscapes throughout the West that were once dominated by aspen are in late successional stages dominated by mixedconifer. If restoration treatments are to be successful, action must be taken soon” (Bartos and Campbell, 1998). Bartos and Campbell use multiple streams of evidence to show that it is likely more than 70% of properly functioning aspen ecosystems have been lost from Monroe Mountain in the recent past ( Figure 9 ). Aspen ecosystems support the highest level of biodiversity for interior western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. “Aspen landscapes in the West provide numerous benefits, including forage for livestock, habitat for wildlife, watershed protection, water yield for downstream users, esthetics, sites for recreational opportunities, wood fiber and Figure 9: Above left: the historical distribution of aspen on Monroe Mountain. Above right: the current distribution of aspen on Monroe Mountain, Bartos and Campbell, 1998. landscape diversity” (Bartos and Campbell, 1998). Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e., 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. The 1998 Bartos and Campbell Fishlake-based publication is now 16 years old and conditions have continued to deteriorate for many aspen ecosystems across Monroe Mountain. The downward trend in properly functioning aspen ecosystems continues across the mountain today, slowed only by the few, relatively small fires and forest vegetation treatments which have produced regeneration and some recruitment once protected. Fire size and pattern has been influenced by changing land use. Monroe Mountain is currently vegetated with fire adapted and fire dependent species across much of its area. As one scans the landscape, it is evident that the vegetation evolved with fire as the aspen/conifer patterns show below (Figure 10). It is also apparent that fires have not functioned within their historic cycles for more than a century as evidenced by the large number of historic aspen stands now overtopped by conifers across the ecosystems. Low intensity surface fires and stand replacing fires occurred at regular intervals historically, more than 250 years ago (Chappell, et al. 1997, Heyerdahl, et al. 2011).  Figure 10: In this landscape view of Langdon Mountain, there is evidence of two historic fires, leaving two different stands of aspen of different ages and succession intervals. The large aspen stand in the left occurred from a fire in 1890’s and the stand to the right is an older fire that occurred in the 1840’s and is being replaced by conifer. However, if one were to look under the aspen canopy of the 1890’s fire, subalpine fir trees are there and haven’t exceeded the aspen canopy yet. There are good indications that both lightning ignitions and human-caused ignitions contributed to fire’s role on the land, historically. “The Indians here seem to be possessed with the spirit of burning, for there is scarcely a day but what we can see fires both on the mountains and in the valleys. We have talked to them about burning up the grass, and they seem willing to spare it, and do set their fires among the sage brush, but it often gets into the grass, and they have already burned much of it, but they try to clear themselves by saying that it will be very good when the rains come in the fall” (Desert News, 1855). “Prior to establishment of the Forest Reserves in 1891, most of the Intermountain Region had undergone major short-term changes in plant cover as a result of extensive use timber harvesting, livestock grazing and fire exclusion. The landscapes we see today often do not resemble what was present when the first European explorers arrived in the early 1800s.” (Ogle and DuMond 1997). Fire patterns began to change dramatically beginning at the time of European settlement in the mid-1800s, when livestock began grazing the valleys and mountain ranges (Jackson et al. 1998). Settlers moved into Sevier Valley in the early 1860s. By the 1870s, many of the surrounding valleys were also settled by incoming Europeans, increasing pressure on the vegetative resources. Livestock grazed the vegetation in the valleys during the winter, and followed the green vegetation up into the mountains during the summer. Deer and elk numbers have increased substantially in the project area over the past 100 years.  This increased grazing reduced much of the fine surface fuel which previously carried the frequent fires. Additionally, successful fire suppression over the past 100 years has almost totally excluded even more of the frequent low to moderate severity fires which had occurred historically. Historic fires (pre-European settlement) consumed a lot of the fine fuels and mixed-conifer seedlings that produced low and mixed severity fires. More than 100 years of fire exclusion have created an environment conducive to uncharacteristic fires, exceeding historic levels of size and/or severity during much of the currently known fire season. These fires would be more resistant to firefighting efforts and potentially more destructive to private and public property than is desirable or acceptable. 2. Fire history and ecology Successful fire exclusion or reduced fire frequency has led to late successional plant species domination (e.g., conifer species replacing aspen) accompanied by accumulation of heavy fuels and loss of understory plants. The available fuels are now taller, denser, more continuous, and more tons per acre are available to burn. This is especially true in areas within the project area that have changed from aspen to a mature mixed conifer. Loss or potential loss, of aspen on these lands can be attributed to a combination of successional processes, reduction (or elimination) of fire, and long term over use by ungulates. Existing conditions indicate that conifers, sagebrush, or possibly shrub communities will eventually replace most aspen stands. The decline of aspen results in loss of water, forage, and biodiversity. Numerous landscapes throughout the West that were once dominated by aspen are late in successional stages dominated by mixed conifer. If restoration treatments are to be successful, action must be taken soon (Bartos 1998). Historically, vegetation in the Monroe Mountain area was fire adapted. Fire played a regular disturbance role in these ecosystems, varying by ecosystem. Low severity surface fires and stand replacing fires occurred at regular intervals (Chappell, 1997, Heyerdahl et al, 2011). Many of the plant communities present were prevented from completing the successional path to the climax community stage because of wildland fires. Specific examples of these ‘disclimax’ plant communities include grass-forb dominated ranges and parklands, and aspen communities which are found across Monroe Mountain. Fire patterns began to change dramatically beginning at the time of European settlement in the mid-1800s, when livestock began grazing the valleys and mountain ranges (Jackson, et. al, 1998). Another source provides additional evidence of fire as a dominant ecosystem process in preceding centuries. Heyerdahl, Kitchen, Brown and Weber (2006) studied fire-scarred tree samples from five areas, located on four different mountain ranges on the Fishlake NF. Their data from 1,482 crossdated tree samples reveal a distinct shift in how frequently fires burned on these mountains. Prior to 1850 (with data back to1200 in one area), most of the areas experienced a couple to many fires during each century. Since 1850 few fire years were recorded in fire-scarred trees, and since 1925, essentially no fires burned on most of the areas studied on the Fishlake National Forest (Campbell, 2011). Aspen-mixed conifer communities on Monroe Mountain developed with fire as an historical disturbance process. Published multi-century fire histories for Monroe Mountain and five regional landscapes with similar topography and vegetation reveal patterns of abundant fire prior to Euro-American settlement in the mid to late-1800s (Heyerdahl et al. 2011). For four sites, stand demographics, surface fire frequency, and fire severity were characterized for plots arranged in grids to represent a broad range in elevation and vegetation type within small watersheds. Aspen was found in 62 percent (59 of 95) of the study plots. Of these, 53 percent were classified in low to mixed severity fire classes with short to moderate fire-free intervals while the remaining plots were classified as having high fire severity and assumed longer intervals. Fire-scarred ponderosa pine trees (Pinus ponderosa) sampled on Old Woman Plateau revealed a consistent pattern of frequent surface fire from the 1500s to the late 1800s. This site is located approximately 40 miles northeast of Monroe Mountain and like much of the eastcentral and southern portions of Monroe Mountain is characterized by gentle terrain with small stands of aspen separated by openings of mostly non-forested sagebrush steppe. Reported fire evidence from Monroe Mountain was limited to 10 fire-scarred ponderosa pine trees sampled from across a large portion of the mountain. Although ponderosa pine is an excellent species for preserving long records of surface fire, it is an uncommon species on Monroe Mountain and as such is not sufficiently abundant to drive fuels and fire dynamics. However, the short to moderate fire frequency evident from the sampled trees ( Figure 12 ) is supported by widespread evidence of past fire in the form of fireinjured Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and Engelmann spruce trees (Picea engelmannii; including multiple injuries per tree; Figure 4 ) and charred remnants. Collectively, this site-specific evidence and data from the intensively sampled regional sites support an interpretation of historic fire-regimes that included a range of short to long fire-free intervals and low to high fire severity, creating and maintaining a diverse and dynamic vegetation mosaic across time and space. These spatially complex fire regimes ended within decades of Euro-American settlement. As a result, structural and compositional diversity was lost as forest communities became dominated by late seral conditions. In mixed stands, aspen cover and viability decreased due to the lack of disturbance over the past 150 plus years. Although persistent or stable aspen (little or no conifer present) may not be dependent upon periodic fire for regeneration, the evidence suggests that fire was sufficiently abundant across these montane landscapes such that even these conifer-free aspen communities were likely exposed to fire periodically. A fire history completed on Monroe Mountain in 1998 concluded that fire’s role had been recurrent until the early 1800s when the local culture changed. Fire exclusion, livestock grazing patterns and livestock use, and other management activities combined to limit fire’s previous role in the area’s ecosystems. Data summaries show that current levels of fire is lacking when compared to historical levels. Consequently vegetation on much of the landscape has grown for long periods, sometimes equal to many times that of historic mean fire intervals without fire. (Chappell et al, 1998). This has created changes in vegetation composition and structure increasing both live and dead fuel loads and ecosystems which are struggling to function without fire. Table 5  describes ‘fire return intervals’ which are more important than an ‘average fire return interval’. If an area hasn’t burned within the interval it is even more at risk of an uncharacteristic fire in either size or severity. Elevation Average Fire Return Interval Range C:\Users\asolt\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\ZO3J3A7U\Monroe_EIS_Proposed_Fencing_Map.jpg3. Recent Fire Occurrence The fire occurrence data base for the Monroe Mountain area shown below is summarized from 1951 to 2013. Fire occurrence is displayed beginning at the top left chart. During the 62 year time span, 272 known ignitions occurred and burned 8807 total acres of land. There is a range from 0 fires to 15 fires per year. The acreage per year was widely divergent, from none to over 2000. There were so few acres burned during many years from 1951 to 1977 that acreage didn’t register on this chart (acreage shown in blue hatch marks). Only two years have had fires that burned more than 2000 acres in over 60 years. Marysvale Peak, Annabella and Blackbird Mine fires burned in 2006 and the Box Creek Fire burned in 2012. More than 80% of the ignitions burned less than a quarter acre each, as displayed in the lower left box as size class A. Only four ignitions burned more than 1000 acres each, again in the lower left box as size class F. The lower central box displays that more than 80% of the ignitions in the last 62 years have been lit by lightning. Humans have ignited 17% of the reported fires and just over 10% were caused by debris burning. This is higher than the Fishlake Forest wide average at 6.6%. A limited analysis of fire A limited seasonality for fire-scarred ponderosa pine on Monroe Mountain suggests that early-season fire dominated pre-1900 fire regimes. In contrast, dry lightning occurrence peaks in the mid- to late-summer. To the extent this limited analysis reflects patterns across the mountain, it suggests a high probability that intentional or accidental ignitions by Native Americans contributed substantially to the overall fire regimes on Monroe Mountain before 1900. Size Class Fire Size (acres) Cause Class Ignition Type A 0 - 0.25 1 Lightning B 0.25 - 10 5. Vegetation Change Over Time  The Fishlake National Forest wrote a Prescribed Natural Fire plan for the entire forest in 1998. The initial section of that plan was a sub-section by sub-section Properly Functioning Condition Assessment, as described by the Region 4 protocols at the time. (Appendix PFC). Table 7  has evolved from the initial assessment as a monitoring tool for vegetation treatments compared to the desired vegetation condition established at the time. Largely due to a reduced occurrence of wildland fire, an increase in wildland fire suppression, and overbrowsing, most of the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain presently do not meet the desired conditions described further in the document. Most of the aspen stands on Monroe Mountain do not have multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the communities. Big sagebrush in several areas is a major component, and fire return intervals have not been adequate to perpetuate aspen in areas that are now seral to conifer. Sustainability of these diverse fire-adapted aspen ecosystems will largely depend on the successful reintroduction of appropriate disturbance processes, and reduction in overbrowsing of aspen. Currently it is difficult for managers to allow fire to play a natural role in the ecosystem due to high stand densities, abundant fuel loading, the forest’s proximity to private property, and public and firefighter safety. The long term intent is that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (Utah Fire Plan 2001).   Table 7: Analysis by vegetation cover type for Monroe Mountain. This table originated from the Fishlake National Forest’s Prescribed Natural Fire Plan (USFS 1998), updated in 2000, and again in 2014. All numbers (with the exception of the Fire Frequency, which is in years) are by 1,000 acres (e.g., The Area in Historic Condition (200 to 400 years ago) for spruce/fir/mixed conifer is 7,000 acres). Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Ponderosa Pine Other Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Totals Fire Frequency (Years) 10- 80 20- 60 5-25 20- 50  Vegetative Cover Type Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine  Vegetative Cover Type Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other Mahogany  Vegetative Cover Type Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated   Figure 15: Historic vegetation compared with existing vegetation and desired vegetation (Prescribed Natural Fire Plan, 2000)       Mixed Conifer – Existing Condition Mixed Conifer types occur across the Monroe Mountain project area at the higher elevations primarily on north facing slopes. These stands consist mainly of older age class Engelmann spruce or Douglas-fir trees intermixed with aspen, white fir, subalpine fir, and mountain shrub. Fire return intervals in this type are typically in the 10-80 year range (Fishlake National Forest, 1998). In those areas where Douglas-fir and white fir are the dominant conifers, fire return intervals are estimated at 10-50 years. Where spruce and subalpine fir occurs, return intervals are believed to be 50-80 years (Jackson, et al., 1998). In areas where spruce occurs without an aspen component, fire return intervals have been documented in the 50 to 300 year range (Bradley, et al., 1992). There are few pure spruce stands within the analysis area. These areas have fairly high fuel loading in the 25 to 60 tons per acre range; (Fishlake 2010 Data Collection) leading the stands to a higher intensity, stand replacing fire regime condition (Ottmar et al., 1998 and Fischer, 1981a). Many of these mixed Douglas-fir and spruce stands in the project area are falling victim to insect and disease attacks, increasing the concentration of dead woody material and contributing to increased fire risk. Fuel loadings during historical times were probably no more than one fourth to one third of present day loadings, or 12 to 18 tons per acre (Dieterich, J. H., 1983). Aspen – Existing Condition The aspen within the Monroe Mountain project area historically dominated the higher elevations. Many of these areas that were once pure aspen stands have declined due to the effects of fire exclusion and browsing. Aspen is being overtaken by subalpine fir and Engelmann spruce throughout much of the analysis area. Many of these stands occur on the steep slopes. Fire return intervals in this fuel type have been estimated at 20 to 60 years (Fishlake National Forest, 1998). These areas would have typically been categorized in a low to mixed severity fire regime depending on the amount of conifer present in the understory. Historically, typical fuel loads for these stand conditions were 3 to 10 tons per acre. Today, however, they are more likely to burn under a high severity regime due to the higher presence of conifer in both the understory and overstory. Today, fuel loading under these conditions range from 3 to 50 tons per acre (Fishlake 2010 Data Collection).      Current Fire Behavior and Safety During the recent uncharacteristic wildfires, fire behavior was more extreme and faster moving than historically. Flame lengths of 50 to greater than 100 feet are common in the mixed conifer fuel types. The typical flame lengths in these fuel types make it extremely difficult for initial attack suppression resources to safely and successfully extinguish fire as shown in Figure 6  and The bottom line is that initial attack, utilizing available engine and hand crews, is likely unsuccessful on hot, dry, windy, days in the heavy, continuous fuel. This makes working conditions unsafe for firefighters and often, the nearby public.  Figure 16: Existing Condition, Flame Length Topography and Weather Slope increases fire behavior by more easily allowing a fire to preheat fuels upslope of the fire and enabling spotting from rolling and aerial firebrands. Flame length and rate of spread increase with an increase in slope. Slopes within the Monroe Mountain project area are moderately steep, and range from <20 on uplands, 30 to 60% on east side of the range and 40 to 80% on the west side of the range. Topographic characteristics that influence fire behavior include slope, aspect, elevation, shape of the land, and the influence of topography on wind. Narrow canyons, box canyons, saddles, chimneys, and chutes all increase fire control problems when compared to other land formations. Topography and topographic shapes can influence wind patterns, convection patterns, and the susceptibility of vegetation outside of the fire to radiant heat from the fire. For example narrow canyons produce a chimney effect for the convection column, preheating fuels located within the “chimney”, narrow canyons can also allow for radiant heat to be transferred from one side (or aspect) of the canyon to the other, thus drying them out and making them easier to ignite. Aspect is the direction a slope faces and, within the Monroe Mountain project area, all aspects are represented. South and southwest aspects typically experience the more severe fire behavior due to the duration of sun exposure and pre-dominant wind directions in this part of the country. Vegetation located on south or southwest aspects typically contain lighter and flashier fuels when compared to other aspects in the same or similar locations. Heavier fuel loads tend to be on the north aspects. Predominant winds within the project area are generally southwest, with local winds based on the topography Elevation affects fire behavior in several different ways including the amount of precipitation received, snow melt dates, fuel types and loadings, vegetation curing dates, the overall length of the fire season, and cooler temperatures in higher elevation resulting in shorter individual burn periods. Summers are typically hot and dry with daytime temperature averaging approximately 85 degrees with single or low double digit relative humidity and poor overnight relative humidity recovery. The monsoonal pattern typically begins to set up in July, but is neither reliable nor predictable. Lightning caused fires occur primarily in July and August associated with the monsoonal pattern typical of the high desert. Often these thunderstorms produce dry lightning and strong winds with little to no moisture. Desired Condition The desired condition as outlined in this document is specific to Monroe Mountain and was developed by the District; it is consistent with the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP; USFS 1986). The desired condition is to have persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate aspen communities, including site-appropriate, biodiverse understories. Big sagebrush, if present would be a minor component of the aspen community. Fire regimes would be adequate to perpetuate aspen, particularly in areas seral to conifer. Table 8  Aspen sprouts are defined as aspen less than 6 feet in height, aspen saplings are defined as aspen 6 to 12 feet in height, and aspen recruits are defined as aspen greater than 12 feet in height. For seral aspen stands, the disparity between the existing and desired condition is great. The existing condition describes 592 sprouts per acre compared to 10,000 to 20,000 sprouts per acre as described in the desired condition. Similarly, the existing condition describes 119 saplings per acre while the desired condition describes approximately 1,000 to 2,000 saplings per acre. Lastly, the existing condition describes 276 recruits per acre, while the desired condition is 400 to 600 recruits per acre ( Table 8 The existing vegetation distribution ( Figure 17 21 These numbers demonstrate that the desired condition of having aspen communities with multi-height stems with adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities are being met.   Aspen Sprouts/Acre (<6 feet in height) Aspen Saplings/Acre (6-12 feet in height) Aspen Recruits/Acre (>12 feet in height)   Min Max Ave Min Current Condition 0 3,286 592 0 911 119 59 615 276 Spruce/Fir Stands 0 4,433 1,121 0 183 38 0 301 137 Mixed Conifer Stands 0 1,255 677 0 233 108 0 286 117 Desired Condition Aspen Structure After Implementation of Mechanical and/or Prescribed Fire Treatments 5,000 No Max 10,000 to 20,000 1,000 No Max 1,000 to 2,000    Environmental Consequences Direct Effects It is likely that large, unmitigated wildfires would continue to occur as this area has had repeated lightning ignitions in the recent past and that lightning pattern is expected to continue. The area has a higher potential for human-caused ignitions as shown by historic data for Monroe Mountain and Fishlake National Forest; see Recent Fire Occurrence section. In the long term (>20 years) wildfires would likely continue at inopportune times and places while aspen continue to lose function as conifer continue to grow into those stands due to lack of disturbance. The fire return interval would continue to increase in these disturbance-based ecosystems. In addition to allowing surface fuels to buildup, this alternative would allow ladder fuels to grow up in areas on the edges of denser forested areas, and woody species continue to expand into aspen. Cumulative Effects Past Vegetation Management Projects Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions on Monroe Mountain Year Brushsaw Durkee Fuels 2004 617 Thompson Basin Brushsaw 2007 579 Total for last 20 years  1994-2013 1962     Box Creek Dixie Harrow 29 1995 Dixie Harrow Six Patch/Rock Springs 109 1995 Bell Rock Dixie Harrow 1996 138 Bagley North Dixie Harrow 1997 47 Little Table Dixie Harrow 1997 126 Thurber Fork Dixie Harrow 1998 570 Dixie Harrow Forshea Mountain 65 2000 Dixie Harrow Blue Peak 2003 766 Box Creek Dixie Harrow 2003 104 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 14 Koosharem Dixie Harrow 2003 76 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 2003 265 Dry Creek Dixie Harrow 2004 93 Durkee Springs Dixie Harrow 2004 466 Hells Hole Dixie Harrow 2004 132 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2004 89 Rueben Burn Dixie Harrow 2004 155 Willis Spring Dixie Harrow 2005 176 Brindley Flat Dixie Harrow 2006 40 Indian Peak Dixie Harrow 2006 95 Box Creek Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2008 156 Thurber Fork Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2009 461 Twin Peaks Dixie Harrow 2012 578 Totals for last 20 years  1994-2013 6,197     Indian Ranch Harvest 1969 47 Langdon Mountain Harvest 1969 17 Monroe Peak Harvest 1980 14 Pole Canyon Harvest 1982 19 Big Flat Aspen 4,5 &6 Harvest 1983 4 Lone Pine Harvest 1984 78 Lower Langdon Harvest 1984 82 South Monument Asp. Harvest 1987 17 Clover Flat Harvest 1989 186 Wooten Spring Harvest 1989 103 Harvest Forshea 111 1998 Harvest White Ledge B 1998 71 Monument Peak Salv. Harvest 1998 60 Dry Creek –State Harvest 1999 151 Mill #8 Salvage Harvest 1999 10 Monument Peak Salv.II Harvest 1999 Year 1980 1986 1988 1988 1989 Buck Hollow 1989 18 Tuft Draw 1989 622 Forshea 1993 1,313 Tibadore Pond 1988 669 Kinney Spring 1996 794 Greenwich Creek Year 1975 1979 1979 1980 1983 Bean Hill 1986 123 Tibadore Pond 1989 387 Killian Spring 1990 407 Monroe Canyon 1996 196 Thompson Basin 1996 103 Flat 1997 5,505 Oldroyd 2000 1,329 Bald Knoll 2003 68 Marysvale Peak 2005 759 Unavoidable Adverse Effects, Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources Second order fire effects would include (but are not limited to) erosion, flooding, debris flows, destroyed infrastructure, changes in visitation to the forest and the economies of local businesses that depend on visitors, and degradation of water resources for wildlife and humans. Loss or damage to the Bonneville cutthroat watershed and boreal toad habitat would be more likely under this scenario.   Figure 19  Table 12 Table 13  Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods There are also two mechanical treatments options being analyzed for Alternative 2 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Photos 10 thru 18; Appendix A): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area ( Table 12 ) (Photos 11, 14, and 17; Appendix A). a. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest). b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest). Table 13  Roads: This alternative proposes to create 8.8 miles of temporary roads for access to mechanical treatment areas.   Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 2 Seral Aspen Stable Aspen 4,025 Mixed Conifer Total Table 12: Alternative 2; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 797 3,146 3,643 382 Spruce/Fir 472 918 Mixed Conifer 8 97 6,553 1,633 Table 13: Alternative 2; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands Prescribed fire activities may affect adjacent private property.  The IRAs ( Figure 20 ) and draft UUAs ( Figure 21 ) adjacent to private property would have a 300-foot mechanical treatment buffer completed first. This 300-foot buffer of mechanical treatments would be completed first to prepare for the application of prescription fire. The 300-foot buffer may be sufficient to minimize impacts from prescribed fire to private property. It is important to note that the 300-foot buffer distance was suggested by the public and was drawn on the maps ( Figure 20  and Figure 21 ) without regard to topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas or wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc. Figure 19: Alternative 2 Proposed Treatment Areas    Figure 20: Alternative 2 Proposed Treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas   Figure 21: Alternative 2 Proposed Treatments within Draft Unroaded- Undeveloped Areas Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Total Acres Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Burned 32,991 27,981  Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 97 4,183 2,510 Seral Aspen 3,146 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 4,025  Table 16 b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest).  c. In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection.  d. If no beetle killed or infected trees are present initially, live trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection.  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Seral Aspen 4,780 Mixed Conifer Total 13,648 Table 16: Alternative 3; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands   Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Figure 22: Alternative 3 Proposed Treatment Areas     31,357 18,814 45,004 32,461 8.8 Table 18: Alternative 3 acreage and temporary road mileage  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 91 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen  Table 20  b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest).   Alternative 4 Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Seral Aspen 9,492 Stable Aspen 6,130 Spruce-Fir 4,113      Figure 26: Alternative 4 Proposed Treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas   Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Prescribed Fire – Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Total Acres Total Acres Factoring 60% of Acres Get Burned Miles of Temporary Roads 19,837 27,436 16,462 47,274 36,300 13.3 Table 22: Alternative 4 acreage and temporary road mileage  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 102 4,178 2,507 Seral Aspen 9,492 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,130 6,693 4,016 Spruce/Fir 4,113 3,802 2,281 Total 19,837 27,436 16,462 Table 23: Alternative 4 acreage by dominant vegetative type Alternative 5 ( Figure 28 ) Seral and Stable Aspen Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are two mechanical treatment options being analyzed for Alternative 5 for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photos 1 thru 9; Appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photos 2, 5, and 8; Appendix A; Table 24 ). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area.  2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (Photos 3, 6, and 9; Appendix A; Table 25 ). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer.         Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are also two mechanical treatments options being analyzed for Alternative 5 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Photos 10 thru 18; Appendix A):  1. This option would occur throughout the project area (Photos 11, 14, and 17; Appendix A; Table 24 ).  a. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest).  b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest).  c. In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection.  d. If no beetle killed or infected trees are present initially, live trees would be thinned using uneven aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection.  2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (Photos 12, 15, and 18; Appendix A; Table 25 ). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in Option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer.  Roads: This alternative proposes to create 12.8 miles of temporary roads for access to treatment areas; 1.3 miles of roads are proposed within draft UUAs ( Figure 30 ).            Existing Vegetation Seral Aspen 5,340 Mixed Conifer 15,072 Table 25: Alternative 5; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce-fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may affect adjacent private property  The IRAs ( Figure 29 ) and Draft UUAs ( Figure 30 ) adjacent to private property would have a more similar mechanical treatment buffer to Alternatives 3 & 4 with variations occurring where Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs occur adjacent to private property. The buffer adjacent to private property would be wider than Alternatives 2 and 3, and similar to Alternative 4 at approximately 1.3 miles wide. Where Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs occur, the mechanical treatment buffers mostly occur along the outside edge of the PFAs (the exception being with two of the PFAs located adjacent to private property that are proposed for treatment; no NAs would be treated) ( Figure 28 ). This buffer of mechanical treatment would be completed first in preparation for being able to implement prescribed fire on National Forest Lands while minimizing impacts to private property and Northern goshawk areas. The mechanical treatment buffers for this alternative were developed using topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas and wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc.   Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total       Figure 29: Alternative 5 Proposed Treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas 26,453 15,872 41,525 30,944 12.8 Table 26: Alternative 5 acreage and temporary road mileage  Existing Vegetation Table 28: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. The risk of large, unmitigated wildfire would be reduced through all the Action Alternatives, although some treatments would better create safer work places for fire fighters and prescribed fire managers to work as the project progresses. The treatments assessed would not fireproof the Project Area; instead they would reduce the amount of fuels near private lands, leading to reduced fire behavior. Reduced fire behavior (flame lengths below 4 feet, reduced spotting and less crown fire initiation) creates a safer place for wildland firefighters and prescribed fire crews to work in both the short and long term.  Options 1 and 2 Compared Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Total Acres Alternative 1 0 0 0 0 0 Alternative 2 8,186 32,991 19,795 41,177 27,981 8.8 Alternative 3 13,647 31,357 18,814 45,004 32,461 8.8 Alternative 4 19,838 27,436 16,462 Flame lengths outputs from the models used are not different enough to be useful in decision-making. Crown Fire Option 2: Thinning a stand from below reduces primarily surface and some ladder fuels. The majority of the crown fuels, both conifer and aspen remain as if untreated. When a crown fire moves into the thinned from below stands, it is possible that it could sustain itself across those stands and into the next, resulting in a fire crossing onto private lands. Until the prescribed burning was completed (up to 10 years) the private lands would be likely to have crown fire from a wildfire cross onto them. Once the prescribed fires were completed, the private lands would be at a lower risk. Treatment Length Option 2 will likely need to be retreated in 10 years, leading to twice the treatment cost over the length of the project and into the future. Indirectly, the estimated retreatment time on Option 2 would be at least double that of Option 1, then it would likely need to be thinned again to keep it open enough to use as a shaded fuel break.   The graph above shows the flame length differences among the No Action and Action Alternatives for Options 1 and 2 within 1 mile of private land. Compared to the No Action Alternative which has 60% of the flame lengths above 4 feet, Alternative 2 has 48% of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths above four feet which is less than the 60%. Within the IRAs/UUAs the majority of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths of more than 4 feet occurs 300 feet or more from private property. These narrow fuel buffer changes will have a direct effect on whether or not the subsequent prescribed fires are completed. Where slopes are steep and fuel mitigation is narrow, it is unlikely that prescribed fires will be lit in a timely manner to conclude the project in 10 years. Ignition windows are limited by current weather and fuel dryness, expected fire behavior and expected weather. There may be few days a year that a prescribed fire can be lit and concluded with success with the proposed fuel changes as ignition/holding barriers. The adjoining wildland fuels are likely to burn much more actively. Alternative 5 shows 32% of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths above four feet. Within the IRAs/UUAs the majority of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths of more than 4 feet occurs 1.3 miles or more from private property.  Figure 32: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Flame Length After All Proposed Treatments Are Completed.    Spotting   Alternative 2 reduces 0.0-0.25 mile spotting from 47% to 37% compared to No Action. Alternative 3 reduces 0.0-0.25 mile spotting from 47% to 26% compared to No Action. Alternative 5 reduces 0.0-0.25 mile spotting from 47% to 14% compared to No Action. Alternative 5 reduces 0.0-0.25 mile spotting from 47% to 25% compared to No Action.  Figure 34: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. Spotting Capable of Producing Embers That Could Develop Spot Fires on Private Land. Mechanical & Slash Burning Completed and Prescribed Fire Not Implemented.  directly addresses Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may affect adjacent private property. It demonstrates that without action, 4,500 acres can produce embers that could cause spot fires on private land. That is, 100% of the spotting produced during a fire can reach private lands. Alternative 2 reduces that to 3,300 acres (72%), Alternative 3 reduces it to 1,400 acres (33%). Alternative 5 reduces is to 1,500 (36%), similar in outcome to Alternative 3. Alternative 4 does the best job of reducing spotting that may reach private lands from fire, reducing the acreage to 500 (13%).  With No Action, no spotting occurs from 49% of the area. 38% of the area can produce embers up to . mile, 12 % can produce embers . to . mile and 1% can produce embers which can travel up to a mile. All action alternatives greatly lessen the total spotting. Alternative 2 exhibits no spotting over 90% of the area, 8% can produce embers up to . mile and 2 % produces embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 3 exhibits no spotting over 95% of the area, 4 % can produce embers up to . mile and 1 % produces embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 4 exhibits no spotting over 98% of the area, 1% can produce embers up to . mile and 1 % produces embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 5 exhibits no spotting over 91% of the area, 7 % can produce embers up to . mile and 2 % produces embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 4 produces the best results for addressing Issue 2 with over 45,000 acres unlikely to produce any spots once all proposed treatments are completed.   Crown Fire and surface fire both reach private lands at high rates under the No Action Alternative. This is of interest as crown fire is indefensible utilizing ground firefighters. Surface fire may be defensible depending on the fire intensity and flame length. More surface fire equates to a higher defensibility in keeping fire off private lands.   Figure 37: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Crown Fire/Surface Fire After All Proposed Treatments Are Completed.      A Fire Activity Index was developed, combining flame length, spotting and crown fire parameters summarized from the fire modeling to show an overall difference among alternatives. These data are summarized in Figure 39         Once all treatments are completed, Alternative 4 provides the lowest overall fire activity index at 98% Low. One percent each remains in the high and moderate categories. The No Action Alternative leaves 45% of the area in high condition with 8% in Moderate. Again, all Action Alternatives lower the fire activity index. Alternative 2 causes 90% of the area to move to Low. Alternative 3 moves 95% of the area to Low, more than double that of the No Action. Alternative 5 also almost doubles the No Action Alternative at 91% Low fire activity index. Cumulative Effects Assumptions For purposes of this cumulative effects analysis, the State of Utah has a history of working with landowners on improving defensible space around cabins. Some defensible space treatments on private lands have already occurred. Defensible space treatments will likely continue into the future as Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands obtains cost sharing grant monies and as stewardship agreements with landowners are completed and implemented.  It is unknown where future private lands defensible space treatments will occur or at what scale or how much fuel will be removed. For purposes of this cumulative effects analysis, it is assumed that all private lands are treated similarly to what is being Figure 39: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (options 1 and 2) and prescribed fire are completed. proposed for the action alternatives (i.e. conifer removal from aspen and basal area 90 in the mixed conifer and spruce/fir dominated stands).  , Table 9 Table 10 , and Table 11 ) in the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir dominated areas are included in this cumulative effects analysis. Over the long term wildfires are likely to occur within the analysis areas. The size and severity of these fires will vary. Based on past wildfires within the analysis area, the results will be an improvement in diversity of plant species, vegetation structure and age classes for all vegetation types. Fuels will begin to increase over time as the stands reestablish. Spotting   Figure 41: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel that could develop spot fires. All of the action alternatives lowered ember production across the treatment areas in the short term. Figure 41 shows that with No Action, no embers are created from 52% of the area, 36% of the area can produce embers up to . mile, 10% can produce embers . to . mile and less than 1% can produce embers which can travel up to a mile. All action alternatives greatly lessen the total ember production. Alternative 2 exhibits no spotting over 92% of the area, 6% can produce embers up to . mile and 2% can produces embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 3 exhibits no spotting over 95% of the area, 4% can produce embers up to . mile and 1% can produce embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 4 exhibits no spotting over 98% of the area, 2% can produce embers up to . mile and less than 1% can produce embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 5 exhibits no spotting over 92% of the area, 6% can produce embers up to . mile and 2 % can produce embers which can travel up to a mile. Alternative 4 produces the best results for addressing Issue 2 with over 65,000 acres unlikely to spot once all proposed treatments are completed. Crown Fire   Figure 42: Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Crown Fire/Surface Fire After All Past, Present, and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions Are Completed. In Figure 42, the No Action Alternative exhibits 49% crown fire post-treatment across the cumulative effects area. All Action Alternatives result in less crown fire than the No Action Alternative. Alternative 2 shows 8% crown fire versus 49% crown fire under No Action. Alternatives 3 and 5 show 5% and 8%, respectively, versus 49% crown fire under No Action. Alternative 4 produces the best outcome for the issue addressed with 3% crown fire versus 49% crown fire under the No Action Alternative after all proposed treatments are completed.        Fire Activity Index   Figure 43: Fire Activity Index After All Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Actions Are Completed. Once all treatments are completed, Alternative 4 provides the lowest overall fire activity index at 97% Low. As shown in Figure 43, 3% remains in the high and moderate categories. The No Action Alternative leaves 41% of the area in High condition with 7% in Moderate. Again, all Action Alternatives lower the fire activity index. Alternative 2 causes 92% of the area to move to Low. Alternative 3 moves 95% of the area to Low, more than double that of No Action. Alternative 5 almost doubles the No Action Alternative at 92% Low fire activity index. Alternative 4 produces the best outcome with over 65,000 acres exhibiting a Low Fire Activity Index. Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Excessive utilization needs to be addressed before fire or other treatments are returned to the system (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1994). If one goal of management is to restore aspen, then animal use needs to be monitored, evaluated, and adjusted. Otherwise, animals utilizing the aspen regeneration can slow or defeat restoration efforts (Bartos in: Hood, 2007).   Conclusions An increase in safety to firefighters and the public is expected from all action alternatives due to treated fuels exhibiting overall lower fire behavior. According to National Interagency Fire Center data, from 1990 to 2013, an average of 18 firefighters were killed annually in the line of duty. Seventeen firefighters have lost their lives while fighting fires in the state of Utah since 1961 (NIFC, 2013).  Proactive fuels management has been shown to be effective in lowering risk to people and private property across the country, and that would be an expected outcome once all the treatments were complete. The largest increase in firefighter and human safety would result from Alternative 4. The least risk to private property also results from Alternative 4 as proposed. It treats the most acres both mechanically and with fire, reducing fuels and therefore lowering fire behavior across the treatment areas.  After this analysis was completed an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory was found near Indian Peak. Approximately 310 acres of the territory overlap this aspen project. If these 310 acres were not treated, there would be little impact to firefighter and public safety. The 310 acres are not close to private lands to have a negative effect if left untreated.  Alexander, Martin E. 1982. Calculating and interpreting forest fire intensities. Canadian Journal of Botany: 349-357. Andrews, Patricia L.; Heinsch, Faith Ann; Schelvan, Luke. 2011. How to generate and interpretfire characteristics charts for surface and crown fire behavior. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRSGTR-253. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 40 p. Chappell, Linda M., Robert B. Campbell, Kevin P. Greenhalgh. 1997. A Fire History Study Conducted On The Monroe Mountain Demonstration Area. Richfield District, Fishlake National Forest and Bureau of Land Management. 24 pp. Desert News. 9/19/1855. Harmony, from Elder S.F. Atwood to Elder E. T. Benson. Harmony, August 1, 1855. Finney, Mark A. Revised 2004. FARSITE: Fire Area Simulator—model development and evaluation. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-4, Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 47 p.  Heyerdahl, Emily K.; Brown, Peter M.; Kitchen, Stanley G.; Weber, Marc H. 2011. Multicentury fire and forest histories at 19 sites in Utah and eastern Nevada. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-261WWW. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.192 p. Jackson, L. L., Campbell, R.B., Chappell, L.M., Greenhalgh, K.P., Shiverdecker, W.T., Weaver, D.A. 2000. Data Update: Fishlake National Forest prescribed natural fire plan: Fire management situation and fire management action plan. USDA Forest Service, Richfield, UT. 146 pp. Kaufmann, Merrill R., Russell T. Graham, Douglas A. Boyce Jr., William H. Moir, Lee Perry, Richard T. Reynolds, Richard L. Bassett, Patricia Mehlhop, Carleton B. Edminster, William M. Block, and Paul Stephen Corn. 1994. An Ecological Basis for Ecosystem Management. General Technical Report RM-246. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 22 pp. Kay, Charles E. 1993. Aspen Seedlings in Recently Burned Areas of Grand Teton and Yellowstone National Parks. Northwest Science, v. 67, no. 2, p. 94-104 Kitchen, Stanley G., 2014. Personal communication. Kitchen, Stanley G. 2010. Historic Fire Regimes of Eastern Great Basin (USA) Mountains Reconstructed from Tree Rings. Department of Plant and Wildlife Sciences, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. 166 pp. Mueggler, W.F. 1989. Age distribution and reproduction of Intermountain aspen stands. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 4:41-45. National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 2012. Online: Pyne, Stephen. 2011. Interview with the National Fire Protection Association. Online: Ryan, Kevin C. and Tonja S. Opperman. 2013. LANDFIRE – A national vegetation/fuels data base for use in fuels treatment, restoration, and suppression planning. Forest ecology and Management 294 208-216. USDA and USDI. 1995. Federal Wildland Fire Management: Policy and Program Review: Final Report. Washington, D.C.  Utah/Intermountain Interagency Prescribed Fire Plan Template. 2014. Bureau of Land Management, National Park Service, US. Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Utah Forestry, Fire and State Lands and Intermountain Region, US Forest Service. 54pp. USDA Forest Service (USFS). 1986. Land and Resource Management Plan for the Fishlake National Forest. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  USDA Forest Service (USFS). 1998. Fishlake National Forest prescribed natural fire plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  USDA Forest Service (USFS). 2000. Decision Notice, Finding of No Significant Impact, and Finding of Non-Significant Amendment of the Forests in Utah for the Utah Northern Goshawk Project. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Intermountain Region Ashley, Dixie, Fishlake, Manti-La Sal, Uinta, and Wasatch-Cache National Forests, Utah.  USDA Forest Service (USFS). 2001. Decision Notice, Finding of No Significant Impact, and Finding of Non-Significant Amendment for the Utah fire amendment project. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ashley, Dixie, Fishlake, Manti-La Sal, Uinta, and Wasatch-Cache National Forests, Utah.      Appendix A: Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) Depictions              Appendix D: Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain; 15 January 2014          Appendix FM  Fire Behavior Modeling    Mathematical modeling is defined as  a  method  of simulating real-life situations with mathematical equations  to forecast  their future behavior . http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/mathematical-model.html#ixzz208g6CMON   Fire behavior modeling has been described as the intersection between science and art. Entering inputs into a computer program and collecting the outputs is the scientific part of modeling, coming up with those inputs can be very much an art.  In order to get accurate predictions, the models must be calibrated to local conditions. A common way of calibrating a model is matching its outputs to past, observed fire behavior. Once the model is sufficiently fine - tuned or calibrated to local conditions, the business of fire prediction can begin (Ager, et al, 2011).  There are many different types of fire modeling software, but all are largely based on Richard C. Rothermel’s Fire - Spread Equation. An excerpt from the BehavePlus model tutorial (Heinsch, et al, 2010) describes the assumptions of the Rothermel Fire Spread Equation. There are ways to deal with many of the limitations, but it is important to be aware of them and avoid using the model predictions in situations for which they do not apply.   Head Fire: The model was developed for head fire, which is fire spreading upslope with the wind. Other modeling techniques are used to find head fire spread rate for cross-slope winds and for non-head fire spread.  Flaming Front: The model describes fire behavior in the flaming front, which is primarily influenced by fine fuels. Burning of larger fuels persists after the initial front has passed, although this aspect of the fire is not included in Rothermel’s surface fire spread model.  Steady State Fire: The fire model is primarily intended to describe fires advancing steadily, independent of the source of ignition. The time that it takes for a point source fire to reach steadystate conditions is not calculated. Special care should be taken in applying predictions to prescribed fire where the behavior is affected by the pattern of ignition.  Uniform Conditions: Fuel, fuel moisture, wind, and slope are assumed to be constant during the time for which predictions are to be applied. Because fires almost always burn under non-uniform conditions, the length of projection period and choice of fuel model must be carefully considered to obtain useful predictions. The more uniform the conditions, the longer the projection time can be.  For this project the FARSITE model was used to calibrate the Landfire landscape and other modeling inputs by replicating as closely as possible the Box Creek Wildfire that occurred on Monroe Mountain in 2012. FARSITE is a fire growth simulation modeling system. It uses spatial information on topography and fuels along with weather and wind files. It incorporates existing models for surface fire, crown fire, spotting, post-frontal combustion, and fire acceleration into a 2-dimensional fire growth model. FARSITE is widely used to simulate the spread of wildfires and fire use for resource benefit across the landscape. FARSITE computes wildfire growth and behavior for long time periods under heterogeneous conditions of terrain, fuels, and weather. FARSITE is a deterministic modeling system, meaning that simulation results can be directly compared to inputs. This system can be used to simulate air and ground suppression actions as well as for fire "gaming," asking multiple "what-if" questions and comparing the results. A good calibration simulation of the Box Creek Wildfire was obtained, and those inputs were then used for the rest of the modeling project. Fuel Models  The fire behavior models use “fuel models” to represent the vegetation through which a fire burns. The fuel is described according to size classes (diameter and surface-area-to-volume ratio) of live and dead vegetation. The fuel model uses 3dead and 2 live fuel classes along with some other variables to describe different types of vegetation including categories of grass, brush, timber, and slash. Scott and Burgan’s dynamic fuel models were used in this project to represent the vegetation types on Monroe Mountain (Scott and Burgan, 2005).  The fuel models are incorporated into a Landscape (LCP) file that stores data describing terrain, tree canopy, and surface fuel (Figure 1). The source of the landscape file is LANDFIRE®. LANDFIRE is a program that provides over 20 national geo-spatial layers (e.g. vegetation, fuel, disturbance, etc.), databases, and ecological models that are available to the public for the US and insular areas. http://www.landfire.gov/    Figure 1. Raster landscape input layers that make up the Landscape (LCP) file.   treatment fuel conditions based on vegetation type and treatment type. These values were then substituted into the LCP file for the treatment areas to give a post 0.04 0.5 m  183 Treatment Fuel Model Stand_Ht Canopy Cover All Con 161 15 m 0.01 10 m 45 Aspen Up to 8" 165, 161 161 18 m 0.03 1.5 m 55 MC Up to 8" 165, 183 185 18 m 0.09 1.5 m 55 MC 90 BA 165, 183 183 18 m 0.04 0.5 m 45 S-F Up to 8" 165, 183 185 18 m 0.09 1.5 m 55 S-F 90 BA . Landscape (.LCP) file, . Initial Fuel Moistures (.FMS) file, . optional Custom Fuel Model (.FMD) files, . optional Conversion (.CNV) files, . optional Weather (.WTR) files, and . optional Wind (.WND) files. It incorporates the following fire behavior models: . Rothermel's ( 1972 ) surface fire spread model, . Van Wagner's ( 1977 ) crown fire initiation model, . Rothermel's ( 1991 ) crown fire spread model, and . Nelson's ( 2000 ) dead fuel moisture model. FlamMap runs under Microsoft® Windows operating systems and features a graphical user interface. Users may need the support of a geographic information system (GIS) analyst to use FlamMap because it requires spatial coincident landscape raster information to run. FlamMap assumptions and limitations Since FlamMap uses the same underlying models (Rothermel’s 1972, 1991, Van Wagner’s 1977, and Nelson’s 2000) for surface fire spread, crown fire spread, and dead fuel moisture, it will inherently have the same assumptions and limitations as each of those models. In addition, FlamMap 5.0 has a number of additional limitations:  . Modeling results assume that all mechanical treatments occurred in 2015, and prescribed fires occurred across all areas proposed for treatment in 2015. In reality, the treatments would be spread out over the life of the project. This means that desired conditions across the entire landscape may not occur concurrently.  . All fire behavior calculations in FlamMap Basic assume that fuel moisture, wind speed, and wind direction are constant for the simulation period.  . The fire behavior calculations are performed independently for each cell on the gridded landscape.  . Flammap does not use a 24 hour clock, so diurnal weather changes, which could affect fire behavior, are not accounted for.  . Canopy characteristic in the Landfire data were adjusted based on Table 1 data to represent posttreatment conditions.  FlamMap runs were made based on weather from June 30 to July 2, 2012. There were several large fires across the State of Utah at that time, so it is very likely that if ignited, a fire would have burned and gotten large on Monroe Mountain. Some of the fires burning in Utah during or around this time period included the Church Camp Fire (7,200 acres), Clay Springs Fire (108,000 acres), Dump Fire (5,500 acres), Grease Fire (16,500 acres), New Harmony Fire (1,957 acres), Pole Creek Fire (2,000 acres), Quail Fire (2,200 acres), Seeley Fire (47,600 acres), Shingle Fire (8,200 acres), Wolf Den Fire (19,900 acres), and the Wood Hollow Fire (47,400 acres). The actual weather observations came from the Signal Peak RAWS on Monroe Mountain and were used to “condition” the model. Since only a single wind speed and http://www.wfas.net/nfmd/public/gacc_map.php?gacc=EGBC Integrating fire behavior models and geospatial analysis for wildland fire risk assessment and fuel management planning . Journal of Combustion, volume 2011, 19 pages, doi: 10.1155/2011/572452.  model development and evaluation. Research Paper RMRS 4 Revised. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. (1,667 KB; 47 pages) Nelson, Ralph M. (2000) Rothermel, Richard C. (1972) Rothermel, Richard C. (1991) Scott, Joe H. and Burgan, Robert E. (2005) .          Appendix PFC: Properly Functioning Condition     This version includes some changes in soil cover that were first sent out in a File Code 2000 letter on August 21, 1997 under the Director of Vegetation Management's signature. Appendix PFC PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION  January 7, 2000 Version   RAPID ASSESSMENT PROCESS  USDA LOGO I. BACKGROUND  A team was assigned in early 1996 by the Intermountain Regional Office Directors to "Establish a process, including criteria and indicators, which will allow identification of areas not currently in a properly functioning condition" [PFC] (see Appendix A). Besides the assigned team; Steve Munson, Entomologist, Ogden Field Office, was recruited for consultation in developing criteria and indicators. Expectations and timelines for the phase one effort are in Appendix A.  http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif Second is an example of application of the process at the Intermountain Region scale and third is an example of the application of the process at a sub-regional scale.  Subsequently, some forests and districts have been applying the process at a landscape scale. No examples of the latter applications are included at this time.  The PFC process and assessments fit within an ecological approach to management and within the concept of "Continuous Assessments and Planning".  The process and assessments herein are in draft form as refinements and corrections are made as experience and understanding accumulates. This document should be viewed more as a "work in progress" than a completed event.  It must be emphasized that PFC is a rapid assessment process and is a part of a greater whole. This greater whole is termed "Taking an Ecological Approach". The less precise term of "Ecosystem Management" is used by many as it is shorter than the phrase "taking an ecological approach". Much of the philosophical foundation for an ecological approach and the Intermountain Region PFC process is given in Kaufmann and others, (1994).  Definitions of PFC and "Risk" were developed by the team to guide process development and to identify systems at risk of not being in PFC. (It is important to remember that PFC is limited to biological and physical conditions and does not reflect potential management strategies.)  Properly Functioning Condition - Ecosystems at any temporal or spatial scale are in a properly functioning condition when they are dynamic and resilient to perturbations to structure, composition, and processes of their biological or physical components.  Risk - Risk refers to situations in which the outcome is not certain, but the chance of system degradation beyond the point of resiliency and sustainability can be estimated.  Properly Functioning Condition .Biological/Physical .Threshold Lost from the System Management Options For EM Social Expectations Functioning but at risk. PFC      III. ECOLOGICAL APPROACH   All PFC assessments should use an ecological approach. An ecological approach requires consideration of three spheres {termed "ecological capabilities" and "social and economic needs" by Kaufmann and others, (1994).} 1. biological and physical (bio-physical), 2. social, and 3. economic. Although PFC works mainly within the bio-physical sphere there is significant relevance to the social and economic spheres. For example:  The Forest Service is charged by laws to maintain certain standards such as clean water, clean air, endangered species and soil conservation while at the same time is directed to provide for a variety of goods and services. These laws not only reflect the biological and physical needs for land  The PFC assessment process is a coarse filter approach to ecosystem sustainability. The most basic concept inherent in an ecological approach and in PFC is sustainability. The international agreement on temperate and boreal forests known as “The Montreal Process” (Canadian Forest Service, 1995) contains 7 criteria and a larger suite of indicators of sustainable forests. The Criteria are: 2. Maintenance of productive capacity of forest ecosystems 4. Conservation and maintenance of soil and water resources 6. Maintenance and enhancement of long-term multiple socio-economic benefits to meet the needs of societies If the Indicators of the Montreal process are examined; the PFC process is closely aligned with at least 6 of 8 indicators under Criterion 1; 1 of 5 of Criterion 2; 2 of 3 of Criterion 3; 5 of 8 of Criterion 4; and 1 of 3 of Criterion 5. The Regional PFC process recognizes the importance of Criterion 6, but our charter specifically excluded it at the time. Criterion 7 of the Montreal Process was taken as a given in the Regional PFC document.  PFC does not deal directly with fine filter considerations in ecological assessments because it is a coarse filter for rapid assessments for “areas not currently in a properly function condition”. It should not be used by itself as a decision making process but rather it is an assessment process adapted to the decision making processes of the National Environmental Policy Act (PL-91-190) of 1970. PFC fits within the planning framework and regulations of the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (PL-94-588).   IV. PROCESS  A. Design  The design includes three scales: Regional; Sub-Regional; and Landscape. These scales are directly related to the Forest Service National Hierarchical Framework of Ecological Units developed under a policy of ecosystem management adopted by USDA Forest Service June 4, 1992. Planning and analysis scales were used instead of the hierarchical framework scales for simplicity and because PFC is a planning assessment. Use of any planning and analysis scales for assessments should include full consideration of the ecological units within the hierarchical framework. Refer to Exhibit A for an overview of how the two systems are related. The publication "Ecological Subregions of the United States: Section Descriptions" dated July 1994 is a valuable reference for any assessments.  Basic characteristics of ecosystems include 1. Structure, 2. Composition, 3. Processes, 4. Patterns. A matrix with these four characteristics as criteria and at three scales (See Exhibit B), was developed to assess PFC. The matrix is used to describe each individual subject area to be assessed. At the scale of the Intermountain Region the subject areas include sixteen vegetation types, a hydrologic regime, a soil quality description, and an aquatic and terrestrial animal description. Indicators of a properly functioning condition were developed for each subject area, by criteria, and at each scale.  Criteria in the matrix are structure, composition, disturbance regime (a surrogate for more basic ecosystem processes), and patterns.  Structure is a means to express the balance of age and size classes for included subject areas related to vegetation types. A defined balance of size classes was estimated to reflect one that would sustain the type in the long term. Simply this means there must be adequate recruitment in the type to sustain a range of age classes. For many of the conifer types the selected range of classes includes: 10 percent Grass/Forb; 10 percent Seedling/Sapling; 20 percent Young Forest; 20 percent Mid Aged Forest; 20 percent Mature Forest; and 20 percent Old Forest. These percentages are estimates or approximations and are not presented as absolute values but are suggested general proportions. The basis for using these vegetative structural stages comes from the work done by Reynolds and others, (1992). They recommended this mixture of classes because it sustained both forest cover types and a large suite of wildlife species. There are exceptions but in general if these relative proportions are sought most of the wildlife and social needs in forested landscapes can be met. For other subject areas such as non conifers, non forest types, riparian/wetlands, soil quality, hydrologic regime, and aquatic and terrestrial animals, structure is expected to reflect a balance not exceeding the sustainable biological and physical capabilities of the resource. The indicators for these subject areas are based on the experience and education of the team members and the knowledge of the scientific studies.  Composition is an expression of species present in each of the subject areas. For vegetation and fauna this includes the dominant species. In the case of vegetation it means the recruitment and sustainability of early seral species while still providing the diversity of all successional species (flora and fauna). In many of the forest, shrub or woodland subject areas this requires a lower cover by mature plants to allow development of associated species such as grasses, forbs, and shrubs to limit the amount of bare soil. Project Area MapPatterns are an indication of how ecosystems function among and between themselves. Criteria addressed the size, shape, age class, distribution, and juxtaposition of structures and composition in and adjacent to each ecosystem. Patterns are evaluated by comparison to their historical ranges (e.g. 100-500 years before present times). Changes between ecosystems such as juniper movement into big sagebrush/grass, and conifer succession into aspen were not the primary objective of the criteria but are part of the consideration of changes in patterns if a type had lost area or grained area. Disturbance regime was used to characterize processes and ecological functions. It includes all known historical disturbances that have effected the ecosystems. These include past grazing, human trampling, logging, foraging by ungulate wildlife, wind, flood, insects, diseases, and fire. Each ecosystem or biome differs in which disturbance factors are or have been most active. The most common factors are fire, insects and disease. For each ecosystem the historical fire regime was described in terms of lethal and not lethal fire intensities and frequencies. This was based on available sources of information from published research and recorded histories. Insect and disease conditions were based on current and past aerial surveys for the ecosystem and the known scientific work and experience. More fundamental ecosystem processes and functions such as carbon balances, nutrient and energy cycles, etc. are more difficult and costly to ascertain at broad scales so disturbance regimes were used as a more easily observed surrogate.  knowledge can provide a basis for evaluating existing conditions and identifying places in the landscape where management activities might efficiently bring current forests into alignment with historic landscape features. Reference conditions can help clarify which management activities work in the direction of improving ecosystems sustainability and which ones might further exacerbate ecosystem unsustainability. (Kaufmann and others, 1998, p. 5)   In the western states, conditions present prior to European settlement are often used as the reference condition to indicate the historical range of variability. Conditions at that time are more readily determined than those of earlier times and many biotic and abiotic elements are continuous from then to the present (e.g. many individual plants may remain and most land forms are the same or little changed). Generally, 100 to 500 years prior to the present is the most commonly employed time frame.  There are problems with the selection of any time period used as the reference condition and these must be kept in mind. For example, the reference period just prior to European settlement occurred at a time when Native American populations were much lower than in previous centuries because of the large numbers of Native Americans who fell victim to European diseases. It is difficult to measure or even estimate the impact of Native American populations on ecosystems because these are rarely recorded or separable from other processes. More or less concurrent with the great reductions in Native American populations was a major shift in climate. The large-scale climatic pattern known as the “Little Ice Age” occurred from about 1550 to around 1860 (other references put it from about 1350 to 1870). Much of the European settlement was at the end of or just after the Little Ice Age so it is difficult to separate changes in biota caused by European settlement from changes driven mainly by climate change or changes driven by the cessation of Native American cultural practices.  Threshold ranges or values are suggested to establish acceptable ranges of PFC to provide for ecosystem sustainability and resiliency. Thresholds were developed by considering all of the factors in a holistic and ecologically based synthesis of the structure, composition and processes in a given biome and comparing the current pattern to historical patterns.   Bureau Of Land Management should be used specifically for site specific assessments in the riparian/wetlands subject area. These checklists provide a place to initiate discussion and a systematic way to help conduct the assessment.   B. Assessment Process  1. Define scale of assessment both temporal and spatial.  2. Assemble team of technical experts for scale(s) being considered.  3. Utilize the appropriate matrices by subject area to determine kinds of resource information needed and available.  4. Select the appropriate subject areas and by evaluating all of the criteria together to make a considered determination if the subject area is: non-functional; or functional - at risk; or within proper functioning condition.   (From: Ecological Subregions of the United States: Section Descriptions. USDA Forest Service, Ecosystem Management, July, 1994. WO-WSA-5.)    EXHIBIT B: Matrix used to assess major subject areas. SUBJECT: SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  PATTERNS (e.g. connectivity, shapes, size, distribution)   EXHIBIT C: STANDARD CHECKLIST (All subject areas except Riparian/Wetlands)  Subject Area Name:____________________________________________________________________________________  Date:______________________ ID Team Members:______________________________________________ __________________________________________________________________________________________  Yes No N/A SOIL/HYDROLOGIC    (1). Surface litter, duff, plant residue and large woody debris is present in quantities sufficient to sustain soil productivity and nutrient cycling.    (2). Ground cover is adequate to protect soils from eroding by overland flow.    (3). Soil infiltration/percolation is adequate to prevent or reduce overland flow.    (4). Water and sediment being supplied by the watershed to the stream is in balance with the stream's transport capability.    (5). Vegetation provides adequate cover and soil binding properties to reduce erosion and encourage infiltration of water.  Yes No N/A VEGETATIVE    (6). Structural classes diverse or balanced for sustainability or recovery.    (7). Diverse composition of vegetation or preferred seral species.    (8). Insect and disease populations at endemic levels.    (9). Fire regimes within historical ranges.    (10). Other disturbance regimes within historical ranges.    (11). Patterns among and between subject areas consistent with historical ranges for ecological units.  Yes No N/A AQUATIC AND TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS    (12). Age classes and reproductive cohorts of native amphibians, fish and (vertebrate and invertebrate) wildlife are present, and adequate to maintain sustainable populations within historical ranges.    (13). Physical and biological habitat elements (communities, species, stages, morphology) are available within seasonal home ranges of native species.    (14). Native fish, amphibian and wildlife species are present in sustainable populations in adapted habitats.    (15). Historical predators, competitors, prey, and habitat modification processes are present, supporting species' viability and sustainability.    (16). Exotic species, diseases, or human uses do not limit, displace, or reduce viability of native species.    (17). Disturbances affect only small portions of animal's annual ranges. (Especially for small, sedentary species with limited movement.)    (18). Animal populations exhibit genetic integrity and diversity, and successful reproductive interchange, without isolation, across historically occupied habitats. Migration, distribution and reproduction unhindered by habitat management or disturbance within historical ranges.  EXHIBIT D: STANDARD CHECKLIST  (Adapted from "Riparian Area Management - TR 1737-9, 1993. BLM, pp. 41-42) Name of Riparian-Wetland Area:__________________________________________________________________________________  Date:__________ Area/Segment ID;_____________________________________Miles________________  ID Team Observers:________________________________________________________________________  Yes No N/A HYDROLOGIC    1) Floodplain inundated in "relatively frequent" events (1-3 years)    2) Active/stable beaver dams    3) Sinuosity, width/depth ration, and gradient are in balance with the landscape setting (i.e., landform, geology, and bioclimatic region)    4) Riparian zone is widening or has achieved potential extent    5) Upland watershed not contributing to riparian degradation  Yes No N/A VEGETATIVE    6) Diverse age-class distribution (recruitment for maintenance/recovery)    7) Diverse composition of vegetation (for maintenance/recovery)    8) Species present indicate maintenance of riparian soil moisture characteristics    9) Streambank vegetation is comprised of those plants or plant communities that have root masses capable of withstanding high streamflow events    10) Riparian plants exhibit high vigor    11) Adequate vegetative cover resent to protect banks and dissipate energy during high flows     Remarks  Proper Functioning Condition _________________________ Upward _________________________ No _________________________ ____ Flow regulations ____ Mining activities ____ Upstream channel conditions    SUBJECT AREAS INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE) CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL:  Characterized by a lack of arboreal vegetation, landscape dominated by shallow soils, fell-fields, boulders, tundra and turfforming vegetation with some areas with low shrubs. (e.g. <1 ft. tall.) Dominated by native, perennial plant species. Indicator lichens and bryophytes are within historical ranges. Bare ground < 15%. Indicator lichens and bryophytes are within historical ranges. Trampling, treading and herbivory are within historical ranges. Hydrologic regime within historical ranges. Boulder fields, alpine turf and meadows within historical ranges. INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE) REGIONAL  Balanced range of structures, sizes and age classes. 20-40% of acres have trees greater than 10 feet tall and 80 or more years of age. Balanced range of structures, sizes and age classes. 20-40% of acres have trees greater than 10 feet tall and 80 or more years of age. Balanced Range: More than 70 % of trees are 5 needle pines (e.g. whitebark, limber or bristlecone) and less than 20% of trees are spruce, true firs or Douglas-fir. 10-20%* [Basal areas typically are less than 100 square feet and SDI is less than 100.] (* indicates proportion of acres) More than 70 % of trees are 5 needle pines (e.g. whitebark, limber or bristlecone) and less than 20% of trees are spruce, true firs or Douglas-fir. SUBREGIONAL: STRUCTURE 40% is Mature and Old. Young Forest COMPOSITION More than 40% of trees are Engelmann spruce.  INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE) REGIONAL      30% Balanced Range: SUBJECT: LODGEPOLE PINE (Pinus contorta)  SUBREGIONAL:  Balanced range of structural stages. Grass/forb  Seedling/Sapling  Young Forest  Mid Aged Forest SUBJECT: GRAND FIR/WHITE FIR COMPLEX (Assumed to be managed for seral species such as Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine or western larch) C:\Users\asolt\AppData\Local\Microsoft\Windows\Temporary Internet Files\Content.Outlook\ZO3J3A7U\Monroe_EIS_Proposed_Fencing_Map.jpg CRITERIA SUBJECT: INTERIOR DOUGLAS-FIR (Pseudotsuga menziesii) INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE) SUBJECT: PONDEROSA PINE/JEFFREY PINE COMPLEX (Pinus ponderosa, Pinus jeffreyi ) INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  STRUCTURE   SUBJECT: PONDEROSA PINE - SOUTHERN UTAH(Pinus ponderosa) INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE STRUCTURE      SUBJECT: PINYON - JUNIPER (Pinus edulis or P. monophylla with Juniperus osteosperma) INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  STRUCTURE   SUBJECT: MOUNTAIN MAHOGANY (Cercocarpus spp.) INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  STRUCTURE INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION SUBJECT: GAMBLE OAK (Quercus gambelii) SUBJECT: TALL FORB  INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  STRUCTURE    SUBJECT: MOUNTAIN BRUSH COMPLEX  INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE SUBJECT: BIG SAGEBRUSH/GRASSLAND (Artemisa tridentata complex) INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  SUBJECT: AQUATIC AND TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  STRUCTURE  SUBJECT: HYDROLOGIC REGIME  INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE  SUBJECT: SOIL QUALITY  INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE)  CRITERIA REGIONAL SUBREGIONAL: LANDSCAPE INDICATORS OF A PROPERLY FUNCTIONING CONDITION (BY GEOGRAPHIC SCALE) SUBJECT: RIPARIAN/WETLANDS   SELECTED REFERENCES Burns, R.M. (comp.) 1983. Silvicultral Systems for the Major Forest Types in the United States. USDA Forest Service, Agricultural Handbook No. 445. Washington D.C. 191 p. Bunnell, F. L. and D. J. Huggard. 1999. Biodiversity Across Spatial and Temporal Scales: Problems and Opportunities. Forest Ecology and Management 115, p. 113-126.   Dahms, C.W., and B.W. Geils (Tech. eds.) 1997. An Assessment of Forest Ecosystem Health in the Southwest. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-295. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. 97 p.  Gunderson, L. 1999. Resilience, Flexibility and Adaptive Management – Antidotes for Spurious Certitude? Conservation Ecology 3 (1): 7. 12 p. [online] URL: http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art7 Johnson, K.L. (ed.) 1983. Proceedings of the First Utah Shrub Ecology Workshop. College of Natural Resources, Utah State University. Logan, Ut. 49 p.  Johnson, K.L. (ed.) 1984. Proceedings of the Second Utah Shrub Ecology Workshop. College of Natural Resources, Utah State University. Logan, Ut. 37 p.   Johnson, K.L. (ed.) 1987. Proceedings of the Fourth Utah Shrub Ecology Workshop: The Genus Chrysothamnus. College of Natural Resources, Utah State University. Logan, Ut. 59 p.  Johnson, K.L. (ed.) 1990. Proceedings of the Fifth Utah Shrub Ecology Workshop: The Genus Cercocarpus. College of Natural Resources, Utah State University. Logan, Ut. 105 p.  Kaufmann, M.R., and others. 1994. An Ecological Basis for Ecosystem Management. General Technical Report RM-246. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 22 p.   Mann, C.C. and M. L. Plummer. A Species’ Fate, By the Numbers. 1999. SCIENCE Vol. 284 p. 36-37. Manning, M.E., and W.G. Padgett. 1995. Riparian Community Type Classification for Humboldt and Toiyabe National Forests, Nevada and Eastern California. R4-ECOL-95-01. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Ut. 306 p.  Mauk, R. L., and J.A. Henderson. 1984. Coniferous Forest Habitat Types of Northern Utah. USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Ogden, UT. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-170. 89 p. Maybury, K.P. (ed). 1999. Seeing the Forest and the Trees: Ecological Classification for Conservation. The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, Virginia, 37 p. McNab, W. H. and Avers, P. E., (comp.). 1994. Ecological Subregions of the United States: Section Descriptions. USDA Forest Service, Ecosystem Management, Administrative Publication WO-WSA-5. Washington DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 267 p. McNeely, J.A., and others. 1990. Strategies for Conserving Biodiversity. Environment, Vol. 32, No. 3 (April, 1990): p. 16-40.  Morgan, P., and others. 1994. Historical Range of Variability: a useful tool for evaluating ecosystem change. In: Sampson, R.N., and D. Adams, (eds.) 1994. Assessing Forest Ecosystem Health in the Inland West. Haworth Press: Binghamton, NY.  Mueggler, W.F. 1988. Aspen Community Types of the Intermountain Region. USDA Forest Service, Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-250. Intermountain Research Station, Ogden, Ut. 135 p.  Olson, R.A., and others. 1994. Tebuthiuron to Enhance Rangeland Diversity. Rangelands, 16 (5) pp. 197-201.  Olson, R.A., and others. 1998. Effects of Thinning Big Sagebrush with Tebuthiuron on Elk and Sagebrush Habitats in Northeastern Wyoming. Reseach Progress Report. Agricultural Experiment Station, University of Wyoming. Laramie, WY. 25 p.  Osmond, C.B., L.F. Pitelka, and G.M. Hidy. (Eds.) 1990. Plant Biology of the Basin and Range. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York. 375 p.  Padgett, W.G., A.P. Youngblood, and A.H. Winward. 1989. Riparian Community Type Classification of Utah and Southeastern Idaho. R4-ECOL-89-01. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Ut. 191 p.  Perry, D. A., and M.P. Amaranthus. 1997. Disturbance, Recovery, and Stability. In: Kohm, K.A. and J.F. Franklin, (eds.). 1997. Creating a Forestry for the 21st Century: the science of ecosystem management. Island Press, Washington D.C. 475 p.  Pfister, R., B. Kovalchik, S. Arno, and R. Presby. 1977. Forest habitat types of Montana. General Technical Report INT-34. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, Utah, 174 p.  Pielou, E.C. 1991. After the Ice Age; The Return of Life to Glaciated North America. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London. 366 p.  Poiani, K., and others, 2000. Biodiversity Conservation at Multiple Scales: Functional Sites, Landscapes, and Networks. BioScience. Vol. 50, No. 2. p. 133-146.  Prichard, D., and others. 1994. Riparian Area Management: Process for Assessing Proper Functioning Condition for Lentic Riparian-Wetland Areas. TR 1737-11, U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, 38 p.  Quigley, T.M., R.W. Haynes, and R.T. Graham (tech. eds.). 1996. Integrated Scientific Assessment for Ecosystem Management in the Interior Columbia River Basin. General Technical Report, PNW-GTR-382. USDA, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, Oregon. 303 p.  Reineke, L. 1933. Perfecting a stand-density index for even-aged forests. Journal of Agricultural Research 16:627-628.  Reynolds, R.T., and others, 1992. Management Recommendations for the Northern Goshawk in the Southwestern United States. General Technical Report RM-217. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 90 p.  Rowe, J.S. 1992. The Ecosystem Approach to Forestland Managment. The Forestry Chronicle. Vol. 68, No. 2.  Sarkar. S. 1999. Wilderness Preservation and Biodiversity Conservation – Keeping Divergent Goals Distinct. BioScience Vol. 49 No. 5 p. 405-412.  Sample, V.A. 1991. Land Stewardship in the Next Era of Conservation. Society of American Foresters. 43 p.  Sampson, R.N., and D. Adams, (eds.) 1994. Assessing Forest Ecosystem Health in the Inland West. Haworth Press: Binghamton, NY. 461 p.  Sampson, R.N., and L.A. DeCoster. 1998. Forest Health in the United States. American Forests. Washington D.C. Allen Press, Lawrence, KS. 76 p. Shaw, C.G. III, F. H. Everest, D. N. Swanston, K. R. Julin, and S.D. Allen. 1999. Independent Scientific Review in Natural Resources Management: A Recent Example from the Tongass Land Management Plan. Northwest Science, Vol. 73, No. 1, p. 58-62. Shaw, D.W., E.F. Alson, and C. LoSapio. (Tech. coords.) 1995. Desired Future Conditions for Pinon-Juniper Ecosystems. General Technical Report RM-258. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 226 p.  Schmidt, W.C., and K.J. McDonald. 1990. Proceedings - Symposium on Whitebark Pine Ecosystems: Ecology and Management of a High-Mountain Resource. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report RM-270. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 386 p. Schmidt, W.C., and F.K. Holtmeier. 1994. Proceedings - International Workshop on Subalpine Stone Pines and Their Environment: the Status of Our Knowledge. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report RM-309. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 321 p.  Shiflet, T. N. (ed.). 1994. Rangeland Cover Types of the United States. Society for Range Management, Denver, Colorado. 152 p.  Steele, R., R. Pfister, R. Ryker, and J. Kittams. 1981. Forest Habitat Types of Central Idaho. General Technical Report INT-114. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station. Ogden, Utah. 138 p. Winward, A.H. 1991. Management in the Sagebrush Steppe. Special Report 880. Agricultural Experiment Station. Oregon State University. Corvallis, OR. 7 p.  Winward, A.H., and W.G. Padgette. 1987. Special Considerations When Classifying Riparian Areas. In: Ferguson, D.E., P. Morgan, and F.D. Johnson, (Compilers). 1989. Proceedings - Land Classifications Based on Vegetation: Applications for Resource Management. General Technical Report INT-GTR-257, USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Ogden, Utah.  Youngblood, A. P., and R.W. Mauk. 1985. Coniferous Forest Habitat Types of Central and Southern Utah. USDA, Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station. Ogden, UT. Gen. Tech. Rep. INT-187. 89 p.  Youngblood, A.P., W.G. Padgett, and A.H. Winward. 1985. Riparian Community Type Classification of Eastern Idaho - Western Wyoming. R4-ECOL-85-01. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Ut. 78 p.            Appendix FL: Flame Length Analysis          MAPS Map FL - 1: Existing Condition. Flame lengths that could result from fire.  Map FL - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire.  Map FL - 3: Alternative 2. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FL - 4: Alternative 3. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. USDA LOGOMap FL - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. Flame lengths that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. Map FL - 5: Alternative 4. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FL - 6: Alternative 5. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif Map FL - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Flame lengths that could result from fire.  Map FL - 8: Alternative 2. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 9: Alternative 3. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 10: Alternative 4. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 11: Alternative 5. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed. Map FL - 1: Existing Condition. Flame lengths that could result from fire. Map FL - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire.  Map FL - 3: Alternative 2. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FL - 4: Alternative 3. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FL - 5: Alternative 4. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FL - 6: Alternative 5. Flame lengths within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Figure FL - 1: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Flame length within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical & slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.   Map FL - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Flame lengths that could result from fire.  Map FL - 8: Alternative 2. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 9: Alternative 3. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 10: Alternative 4. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 11: Alternative 5. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Figure FL - 2: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Flame lengths that could result after all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.  Map FL - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. Flame lengths that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map FL - 13: Alternative 3 Cumulative Effects. Flame lengths that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map FL - 14: Alternative 4 Cumulative Effects. Flame lengths that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map FL - 15: Alternative 5 Cumulative Effects. Flame lengths that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Figure FL - 3: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Flame lengths that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. Appendix S: Spotting Analysis   MAPS Map S - 1: Existing Condition. Acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 3: Alternative 2. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map S - 4: Alternative 3. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. USDA LOGOMap S - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Map S - 5: Alternative 4. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map S - 6: Alternative 5. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif Map S - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 8: Alternative 2. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 9: Alternative 3. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 10: Alternative 4. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 11: Alternative 5. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. FIGURES Figure S - 1: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) completed and prescribed fire not implemented. Figure S - 2: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Acres capable of producing embers that could develop spot fires on private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. Figure S - 3: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Figure S - 4: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 1: Existing Condition. Acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 3: Alternative 2. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map S - 4: Alternative 3. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map S - 5: Alternative 4. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map S - 6: Alternative 5. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Figure S - 1: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Acres within 1 mile of private land capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires. Mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) completed and prescribed fire not implemented.  Figure S - 2: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Acres capable of producing embers that could develop spot fires on private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map S - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 8: Alternative 2. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 9: Alternative 3. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 10: Alternative 4. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 11: Alternative 5. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Figure S - 3: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. After all proposed mechanical & slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 13: Alternative 3 Cumulative Effects. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 14: Alternative 4 Cumulative Effects. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Map S - 15: Alternative 5 Cumulative Effects. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.  Figure S - 4: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. After all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel, that could develop spot fires.           Appendix CF: Crown/Surface Fire Analysis                   Map CF - 11: Alternative 5. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed. MAPS Map CF - 1: Existing Condition. Crown and surface fire activity that could result from fire.  Map CF - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire.  Map CF - 3: Alternative 2. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  USDA LOGO Map CF - 4: Alternative 3. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map CF - 5: Alternative 4. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gifMap CF - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. Map CF - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Crown and surface fire activity that could result from fire.  Map CF - 8: Alternative 2. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map CF - 9: Alternative 3. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map CF - 10: Alternative 4. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map CF - 1: Existing Condition. Crown and surface fire activity that could result from fire.  Map CF - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire.  Map CF - 3: Alternative 2. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map CF - 4: Alternative 3. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map CF - 5: Alternative 4. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map CF - 6: Alternative 5. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Figure CF - 1: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Crown and surface fire activity within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.   Map CF - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Crown and surface fire activity that could result from fire.  Map CF - 8: Alternative 2. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map CF - 9: Alternative 3. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map CF - 10: Alternative 4. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map CF - 11: Alternative 5. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Figure CF - 2: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire treatments are completed.   Map CF - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map CF - 13: Alternative 3 Cumulative Effects. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map CF - 14: Alternative 4 Cumulative Effects. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map CF - 15: Alternative 5 Cumulative Effects. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Figure CF - 3: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Crown and surface fire activity that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.         MAPS Map FAI - 1: Existing Condition. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result from fire.  Map FAI - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire.  Map FAI - 3: Alternative 2. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FAI - 4: Alternative 3. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. USDA LOGOMap FAI - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. Map FAI - 5: Alternative 4. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FAI - 6: Alternative 5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. http://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif Map FAI - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result from fire.  Map FAI - 8: Alternative 2. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map FAI - 9: Alternative 3. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map FAI - 10: Alternative 4. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map FAI - 11: Alternative 5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed. FIGURES Figure FAI - 1: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented. Figure FAI - 2: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed. Figure FAI - 3: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.   Map FAI - 1: Existing Condition. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result from fire.  Map FAI - 2: Alternative 1 – No Action. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire.  Map FAI - 3: Alternative 2. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FAI - 4: Alternative 3. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FAI - 5: Alternative 4. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Map FAI - 6: Alternative 5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.  Figure FAI - 1: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) within 1 mile of private land that could result from fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire not implemented.   Map FAI - 7: Alternative 1 – No Action. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result from fire.  Map FAI - 8: Alternative 2. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map FAI - 9: Alternative 3. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map FAI - 10: Alternative 4. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Map FAI - 11: Alternative 5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.  Figure FAI - 2: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (Options 1 & 2) and prescribed fire are completed.   Map FAI - 12: Alternative 2 Cumulative Effects. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map FAI - 13: Alternative 3 Cumulative Effects. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map FAI - 14: Alternative 4 Cumulative Effects. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Map FAI - 15: Alternative 5 Cumulative Effects. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Figure FAI - 3: Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after that could result after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. USDA LOGOhttp://fsweb.wo.fs.fed.us/images/Usfs.gif Volume I      United States  Final Environmental Impact Statement Department of Agriculture  Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project  Forest Service  August 2015            Richfield Ranger District, Fishlake National Forest Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah Legal Description: Multiple sections in Ranges 1, 2, 2 ., and 3 West and in Townships 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29 South       The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities based on race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs). Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. MONROE MOUNTAIN ASPEN ECOSYSTEMS RESTORATION PROJECT FINAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT Sevier and Piute Counties, Utah   Lead Agency: USDA Forest Service  Cooperating Agencies: Utah Division of Wildlife Resources  Responsible Official: Jason Kling, Richfield District Ranger  Richfield Ranger District  115 East 900 North  Richfield, Utah 84701  For Information Contact: Jason Kling, Richfield District Ranger  Richfield Ranger District  115 East 900 North  jkling@fs.fed.us  Richfield, Utah 84701  Phone: (435) 896-1080  Abstract: This final environmental impact statement describes the impacts of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on stable and seral dominated aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands on Monroe Mountain. The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. To help accomplish this purpose, the Richfield Ranger District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. The agency developed four action alternatives and the no action alternative, which are outlined and analyzed in this final environmental impact statement.  SUMMARY  The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions outlined in the Fishlake National Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan. The area affected by the proposal includes Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain.  In January 2010, the Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group (UFRWG) finalized the 2010 Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah. As part of this effort, the UFRWG submitted a call for project proposals that could effectively test the newly created guidelines. The Forest submitted the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to the UFRWG for their consideration. The proposal was accepted and in April 2011, the working group created the Monroe Mountain Working Group to provide recommendations and feedback to the District as the project was developed.  The project was posted on the Forest’s schedule of proposed actions website on October 1, 2012, the notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement was published in the Federal Register on October 3, 2012 (FR Doc. 2012-24317), and an open house and several public meetings were held to discuss the project proposal. The notice of availability of the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) was published in the Federal Register on January 16, 2015 starting the 45-day comment period, which ended on March 2, 2015. The legal notice was published in the newspaper of record on January 21, 2015. Public meetings were held on January 29, 2015 and January 30, 2015. In addition, in January and February 2015 the Fishlake National Forest met with the Monroe City Council, Six County Association of Governments, Sevier County Council of Governments, WildEarth Guardians, Western Watersheds, Yellowstone to Uintas, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, Sportsman for Fish and Wildlife, Piute County Commission, Monroe Mountain Working Group, Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group, and the Sevier County Commission. The Forest received 35 comment letters from 31 entities regarding the DEIS (appendix D).  Issues raised by the public include the potential for project activities to impact: wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics; private property; Northern goshawk, Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki pleuriticus) and boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas); stable aspen dominated stands and new aspen shoots post-treatment from browsing by domestic and wild ungulates; livestock permittees; and old growth characteristics. These issues led the agency to develop five alternatives including the no action alternative. The biggest differences in the action alternatives are the amount and locations of mechanical treatments and associated slash burning, and prescribed fire treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands, and the location and mileage of temporary roads.  Based upon the effects of the alternatives, the responsible official would decide: (1) the location and treatment methods for all restoration activities; (2) design criteria, mitigation, and monitoring requirements; and (3) the browse threshold/response option components.  Major conclusions include:  Inventoried Roadless Area and draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas  The five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) located in the project area presently average low to moderate ratings for the six wilderness qualities or attributes. The southern portion of the Signal Peak IRA is the best area that seems to hold the potential for manageability as a wilderness area. Alternatives 2 through 5 would leave stumps mostly flush with the ground and a burned appearance. No roads would be constructed, no clear cuts are proposed, control lines would be feathered and reclaimed, sensitive areas would be avoided, and timing restrictions would be imposed. The proposed actions would only temporarily reduce the qualities or attributes and characteristics until the vegetation grows and recovers over a period of about 3 to 5 years. Therefore, alternatives 2 through 5 would take place without permanently lowering the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change.  Effects to the draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) would be the same as for the IRAs with the exception of temporary roads in alternatives 4 and 5 being constructed. These roads would be reclaimed after use and would only temporarily reduce the wilderness qualities, or attributes, and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not permanently change.  Fire and Fuels  An increase in safety to firefighters and the public is expected from all action alternatives due to treated fuels exhibiting overall lower fire behavior. According to National Interagency Fire Center data, from 1990 to 2013, an average of 18 firefighters were killed annually in the line of duty. Seventeen firefighters have lost their lives while fighting fires in the state of Utah since 1961 (NIFC 2013).  Proactive fuels management has been shown to be effective in lowering risk to people and private property across the country, and that would be an expected outcome once all the treatments were complete. The largest increase in firefighter and human safety would result from alternative 4. The least risk to private property also results from alternative 4 as proposed. It treats the most acres both mechanically and with fire, reducing fuels and therefore lowering fire behavior across the treatment areas.  Northern Goshawk  Maintaining adequate structural components within the Nest Areas (NAs) and Post-fledgling Areas (PFAs) of Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) territories to ensure habitat effectiveness, which encompasses the entire portion of their life cycle when they are on the forest is crucial to maintain viability. It is also important to follow recommendations in foraging habitat to manage for prey species habitat. These structural components referred to in the goshawk amendment (USFS 2000) will help maintain a prey base for the adults to utilize during mating and rearing season as well as for the fledglings when they are old enough to hunt for themselves within the territory. Alternatives 3, 4, and 5 do not allow enough of the habitat requirements to maintain this need. Alternative 2 would allow enough habitat requirements to be maintained. Alternatives 3, 4, and 5 may cause territory abandonment across the Monroe landscape. This abandonment may result in dispersion from Monroe Mountain to other mountain ranges or make the birds susceptible to predation. This would move further away from the LRMP goal of a viable population across the forest.    Aquatic Resources  Bonneville Cutthroat Trout and Boreal Toads  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, timber/thinning operations, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition and densities and riparian environments, which has reduced habitat for Bonneville cutthroat trout, resident trout species, and boreal toads in some cases and created habitat in others. In general, stream habitats have generally been reduced in quantity and quality, and beaver density reduced from pre-European settlement conditions, while large (verses small beaver pond) lake quantity has increased.  Across their historic range, Bonneville cutthroat trout have generally been displaced by nonnative trout species. Bonneville cutthroat trout only occur on Monroe Mountain where they have been reintroduced into the Manning Creek drainage. Despite these cumulative effects and concerns, these streams remain an important fisheries resource in the state of Utah, although the true potential biomass for these streams is not known.  The direct and indirect effects from the proposed action to Bonneville cutthroat trout are expected to be of a short to mid-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the no action alternative or one of the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable adverse changes to the aquatic species discussed in this document or extrapolated to other aquatic species with similar habitats. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect population numbers or viability of the Bonneville cutthroat trout and resident trout in the long term.  Monroe Mountain is a very important area for boreal toad conservation in the state of Utah, although the true historic population size and distribution of boreal toads on Monroe Mountain is not known.  The effects of the activities listed in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the no action alternative or the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable changes to boreal toads. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect population numbers or viability of boreal toads in the long term.  Browsing by Domestic and Wild Ungulates  With many demands for forage in the West, including elk, deer, and permitted livestock grazing the decision to take no action and face losing such prolific producers of forage, as aspen are capable of, should not be acceptable. A decision to make no changes in management (no treatments) is still a decision and it carries its own risks and consequences as succession continues to move the vegetation toward late seral vegetation communities. The risks and consequences include (1) continued degradation of the aspen ecosystem, (2) continued loss of forage, and (3) increased risks of large wildfires with associated concerns.  Alternatives 2 through 5 are all large-scale aspen ecosystem treatments designed to restore aspen ecosystems. These alternatives would treat approximately 23 to 27 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain. Adequate regeneration and protection of the regeneration from the effects of overgrazing (livestock and wildlife) are keys to the success of this project, to restore aspen ecosystems. The rangeland resources should benefit from any of the treatments. The difference between the alternatives regarding disturbance associated with the miles of temporary roads is small and should not affect the results of the project.  There are design features built into this proposed project that are designed to address two issues. First, livestock will not be allowed to graze treated areas for two to three growing seasons after treatment. Second, the District is proposing quantifiable thresholds of maximum percent aspen browse that would be acceptable following mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments and response options that would be implemented if thresholds are exceeded (section 2.9 and appendix C). These browse thresholds and response options are applicable to Alternatives 2 through 5. Based on implementation of the browse thresholds and response options, an adequate number of new aspen sprouts following treatments are expected to reach 6 feet in height and stable aspen stands are expected to begin showing improvement; thus moving towards accomplishing the desired conditions outlined for this project.  Livestock Permittees  The acres proposed for treatment through this project are located in ten different grazing allotments. Impacts to permittees would be minimized by the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas and/or stable aspen stands can be rested while nontreatment areas can continue to be grazed. The permittees will also be notified at least 1 year in advance of treatments being done on their allotments so that they can plan accordingly. Based on this summary, the District anticipates that permittees will have a place to graze their livestock while treatment areas or stable aspen stands are rested.  Even though the difference in effects may be minor, alternative 4 would be the best alternative for range management on Monroe Mountain because more acres, 27 percent of National Forest System land on Monroe Mountain, would be treated. This alternative has the most potential to produce an increase in forage resources for grazing animals.  Old Growth  Alternatives 2 and 3 show an 11 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternatives 2 and 3, options 1 and 2 result in Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) related old growth standards being achieved. Alternative 4 shows a 10 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 4, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved. Alternative 5 shows a 9 percent decline in forested old growth for options 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 5, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved.  Table of Contents SUMMARY ............................................................................................... iii 1 Purpose and Need for Action ...................................................... 1 1.1 Introduction ............................................................................................................. 1 1.2 Project-Level Pre-decisional Administrative Review Process ............................... 2 1.3 Background and Historic Conditions ...................................................................... 3 1.4 Existing and Desired Conditions ............................................................................ 7 1.5 Purpose and Need for Action ................................................................................ 27 1.6 Management Direction and Guidance .................................................................. 27 1.7 Proposed Action .................................................................................................... 30 1.8 Fire Severity Definitions ....................................................................................... 31 1.9 Decision Framework ............................................................................................. 32 1.10 Other Planning Efforts .......................................................................................... 32 1.11 Relationship to the Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) .................... 32 1.12 Management Direction.......................................................................................... 32 1.13 Public Involvement ............................................................................................... 33 1.13.1 Collaboration................................................................................................... 33 1.13.2 Scoping and Draft Environmental Impact Statement ..................................... 34 1.13.3 Public Meetings .............................................................................................. 35 1.13.4 Cooperating Agencies ..................................................................................... 35 1.14 Tribal Consultation ............................................................................................... 36 1.15 Issues ..................................................................................................................... 36 1.15.1 Issue 1 – Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation .................................................................................... 37 1.15.2 Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property ...... 37 1.15.3 Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced37 1.15.4 Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded ...................................................................... 38 1.15.5 Issue 5 – Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots posttreatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands .......................................... 38 1.15.6 Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons)................................................................................ 38 1.15.7 Issue 7 – Project activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics .................................................................................................. 39 2 Proposed Action and alternatives ............................................. 40 2.1 Introduction ........................................................................................................... 40 2.2 Proposed Action .................................................................................................... 40 2.2.1 Proposed Mechanical Treatments ................................................................... 40 2.2.2 Proposed Prescribed Fire Treatments ............................................................. 43 2.3 Design Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to all Action Alternatives . 44 2.3.1 Mechanical Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning, and Prescribed Fire Treatments ............................................................................. 44  Mechanical Thinning Treatments and Associated 2.3.2 Slash Pile Burning ........... 46 2.3.3 Prescribed Fire Treatments ............................................................................. 47 2.3.4 Aquatics Monitoring and Design Features ..................................................... 48 2.3.5 Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails ............................................. 51 2.4 Temporary Fencing around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake ...... 54 2.5 Treatment Sequencing .......................................................................................... 54 2.6 Treatment Monitoring, Aspen Overbrowsing Thresholds, and Response Options for All Action Alternatives ................................................................................... 55 2.6.1 Areas Proposed for Mechanical and/or Prescribed Fire Treatments .............. 55 2.6.2 Stable Aspen Stand Areas ............................................................................... 59 2.7 Alternative Development Process ......................................................................... 62 2.8 Response to Issues 5 through 7 ............................................................................. 64 2.8.1 Issue 5 – Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots posttreatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. ......................................... 64 2.8.2 Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons)................................................................................ 64 2.8.3 Issue 7 – Project activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics. ................................................................................................. 65 2.9 Alternatives Considered in Detail ......................................................................... 65 2.9.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) ............................................................................... 65 2.9.2 Alternative 2.................................................................................................... 66 2.9.3 Alternative 3.................................................................................................... 76 2.9.4 Alternative 4.................................................................................................... 87 2.9.5 Alternative 5.................................................................................................... 97 2.10 Comparison of Alternatives ................................................................................ 108 2.11 Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Further Analysis and Record of the Evolution of the Proposed Action and Alternatives ........................................... 115 2.11.1 No Mechanical Thinning Treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas, draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas ...................................................................... 123 2.11.2 Clearcut Seral and Stable Aspen Stands ....................................................... 123 2.11.3 Remove conifer first. If the remaining aspen have a stand density index greater than 140, then thin the remaining aspen to a stand density index of 140. .... 123 2.11.4 Temporary Fencing of all Treated Areas to Exclude Ungulate Browsing on Aspen Shoots ............................................................................................................ 124 2.11.5 Sequencing – Begin mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on the north end of Monroe Mountain and work in a southerly direction. .................................. 124 2.11.6 Jack-strawing within all mechanical treatment areas .................................... 124 3 Affected Environment And Environmental Consequences .. 126 3.1 Issue 1 – Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation ........................................................................................ 126 3.1.1 Affected Environment ................................................................................... 126 3.1.2 Alternatives ................................................................................................... 152  Inventoried Roadless Area Wilderness Quality or Attributes 3.1.3 and Potential Effects by Alternative................................................................................................ 159 3.1.4 Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area Wilderness Characteristics and Potential Effects by Alternative ................................................................................... 185 3.1.5 Cumulative Effects for All Alternatives ....................................................... 204 3.1.6 Desired Condition ......................................................................................... 205 3.1.7 Conclusions ................................................................................................... 205 3.1.8 Compliance with the LRMP and Other Regulatory Direction...................... 206 3.2 Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property .......... 206 3.2.1 Agency Level Direction ................................................................................ 206 3.2.2 Methodology for Analysis ............................................................................ 208 3.2.3 Timeframes and Spatial Boundaries ............................................................. 209 3.2.4 Environmental Indicators .............................................................................. 209 3.2.5 Affected Environment ................................................................................... 212 3.2.6 Environmental Consequences ....................................................................... 219 3.2.7 Conclusions ................................................................................................... 240 3.3 Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced .. 240 3.3.1 Methodology for Analysis ............................................................................ 240 3.3.2 Analysis Area ................................................................................................ 241 3.3.3 Direct and Indirect Effects ............................................................................ 241 3.3.4 Cumulative Effects........................................................................................ 250 3.3.5 Conclusion .................................................................................................... 251 3.4 Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and Boreal toad habitat near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake being severely degraded .............................................................................................................. 251 3.4.1 Affected Environment ................................................................................... 251 3.4.2 Land and Resource Management Plan Management Area Description and applicable Goals, General Direction and Standard and Guidelines .............. 252 3.4.3 Aquatic Biota Cumulative Effects Area ....................................................... 253 3.4.4 Threatened, Endangered, and Candidate Species ......................................... 255 3.4.5 Sensitive Species ........................................................................................... 256 3.4.6 Aquatic Management Indicator Species ....................................................... 262 3.4.7 Aquatic Field Review ................................................................................... 266 3.4.8 Direct and Indirect Effects ............................................................................ 285 3.5.2 Mule Deer (Odocoileus hemionus) ............................................................... 361 3.5.3 Domestic Ungulates (Cattle (Bos taurus) and Sheep (Ovis aries)) .............. 368 3.6 Issue 7 – Project activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics ...................................................................................................... 387 3.6.1 Methodology for Analysis ............................................................................ 387 3.6.2 Affected Environment ................................................................................... 388 3.6.3 Environmental Consequences ....................................................................... 390 3.6.4 Conclusions ................................................................................................... 395 3.7 All Other Resources ............................................................................................ 395 3.8 Short-term Uses and Long Term Productivity .................................................... 396 3.9 Unavoidable Adverse Effects ............................................................................. 397 3.10 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources ................................. 397 3.11 Cumulative Effects.............................................................................................. 398 3.12 Other Required Disclosures ................................................................................ 398 4 Consultation and Coordination ............................................... 399 4.1 Preparers and Contributors ................................................................................. 399 4.2 Federal, State, and Local Agencies and Representatives .................................... 400 4.3 List of Acronyms ................................................................................................ 401 Index…………………………………………………………………………...403 References ........................................................................................... 405 Figures Figure 1. Project vicinity map .................................................................................................................................... 4 Figure 2. Monroe Mountain historic (200 to 400 years ago) vegetation distribution ............................................. 5 Figure 3. Chronologies of surface fires at Monroe Mountain, sampled over an approximately 35-mile north south transect. Each horizontal line indicates the length of record for a single tree. The short vertical lines indicate years when that tree had a fire scar. Recorder years (solid lines) generally follow the first scar on each tree. Non-recorder years (dashed lines) precede the formation of the first scar on each tree, but also occur when a period of the fire record was consumed by subsequent fires or decay. Inner and outer dates are the dates of the earliest or latest rings sampled for trees where pith or bark was not sampled (Heyerdahl et al. 2011). ................................ 7 Figure 4. Fire-scarred Engelmann spruce, with evidence of three separate fires near Monkey Flat Ridge, Monroe Mountain (photo credit Stan Kitchen). ...................................................................................... 7 Figure 5. Summary of elk, mule deer, cattle, and sheep Animal Unit Months (AUMs) since the early 1900s. Deer AUMs are unknown for 1910 and 1920. ......................................................................................... 8 Figure 6. Monroe Mountain existing vegetation distribution .................................................................................. 9 Figure 7. Monroe Mountain desired vegetation distribution ................................................................................. 10 Figure 8. Existing vegetation on Monroe Mountain ............................................................................................... 11 Figure 9. Stable aspen monitoring sites ................................................................................................................. 15 Figure 10. High-density stable aspen (SA1) with 1200 aspen canopy trees per acre. The absence of smallsized trees is due to growth suppression by the dense over-story and should not be viewed as an indication of unhealthy condition. ........................................................................................................ 16 Figure 11. Low-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as fully self-replacing (SA2- F). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 30 aspen recruits, 220 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................................... 17 Figure 12. Low-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as transitionally selfreplacing (SA2-T). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 15 aspen recruits, 110 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................... 17 Figure 13. Low-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as marginally self-replacing (SA2-M). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 8 aspen recruits, 55 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................................... 18 Figure 14. Low-density stable aspen with insufficient small-trees to be capable of self-replacement (SA2-N). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 4 aspen recruits, 20 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. ......................................................................................................................................................... 18 Figure 15. Moderate-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as fully self-replacing (SA3-F). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 30 aspen recruits, 260 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................................... 19 Figure 16. Moderate-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as transitionally selfreplacing (SA3-T). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 15 aspen recruits, 130 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................... 19 Figure 17. Moderate-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as marginally selfreplacing (SA3-M). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 8 aspen recruits, 65 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................... 20 Figure 18. Moderate-density stable aspen with insufficient small-trees to be capable of self-replacement (SA3-N). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 4 aspen recruits, 32 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre. .................................................................................................................................... 20 Figure 19. Elk habitat on Monroe Mountain ............................................................................................................ 26 Figure 20. Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan Management Areas ...................... 29 Figure 21. Proposed fencing near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake ............................................ 52 Figure 22. General treatment sequencing ............................................................................................................... 53 Figure 23. Projected maximum browse pressure in relation to initial aspen shoot density and time (years) needed for shoots to reach 6 feet height ............................................................................................. 57 Figure 24. Potential livestock exclosures ............................................................................................................... 63 Figure 25. Alternative 2 treatment areas ................................................................................................................. 71 Figure 26. Alternative 2 treatment areas within Inventoried Roadless Areas. ..................................................... 72 Figure 27. Alternative 2 treatment areas within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas ......................................... 73 Figure 28. Mechanical and slash burning acres by cover type for alternative 2 ................................................. 74 Figure 29. Prescribed fire acres by cover type for alternative 2 ........................................................................... 75 Figure 30. Alternative 3 treatment areas ................................................................................................................. 81 Figure 31. Alternative 3 treatment areas within Inventoried Roadless Areas ...................................................... 82 Figure 32. Alternative 3 treatment areas within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas ......................................... 83 Figure 33. Mechanical treatment acreages by cover type for alternative 3 ......................................................... 84 Figure 34. Prescribed fire treatments by cover type for alternative 3 .................................................................. 85 Figure 35. Alternative 4 treatment areas ................................................................................................................. 92 Figure 36. Alternative 4 treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas .............................................................. 93 Figure 37. Alternative 4 treatments within draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) .................................... 94 Figure 38. Mechanical treatment acres by cover type for alternative 4 ................................................................ 95 Figure 39. Prescribed fire treatment acres by cover type for alternative 4 .......................................................... 96 Figure 40. Alternative 5 treatment areas ............................................................................................................... 102 Figure 41. Alternative 5 treatment areas within Inventoried Roadless Areas .................................................... 103 Figure 42. Alternative 5 treatment areas within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas with associated roads. 104 Figure 43. Mechanical treatment acres by cover type for alternative 5 .............................................................. 105 Figure 44. Prescribed fire treatment acres by cover type for alternative 5 ........................................................ 106 Figure 45. Area 1 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 116 Figure 46. Area 2 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 117 Figure 47. Area 3 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 118 Figure 48. Area 4 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 119 Figure 49. Area 5 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 120 Figure 50. Area 6 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 121 Figure 51. Area 7 temporary roads ........................................................................................................................ 122 Figure 52. Existing Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) and acreages on Monroe Mountain ........................... 127 Figure 53. Existing draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) and acreages on Monroe Mountain ............ 128 Figure 54. A fire behavior characteristics chart illustrates two primary characteristics of fire behavior - spread rate and intensity. Figures on the chart are an indication of fire suppression effectiveness related to flame length (Andrews et al. 2011). .................................................................................... 211 Figure 55. In this landscape view of Langdon Mountain, there is evidence of two historic fires, leaving two different stands of aspen of different ages and succession intervals. The large aspen stand on the left occurred from a fire in the 1990s and the stand to the right is an older fire that occurred in the 1840s and is being replaced by conifer. However, if one were to look under the aspen canopy of the 1890s fire, subalpine fir trees are there and have not exceeded the aspen canopy yet. ..... 212 Figure 56. The occurrence on Monroe Mountain for 1951 through 2013, cumulative effects area. ................. 214 Figure 57. Historic vegetation compared with existing vegetation and desired vegetation (Prescribed Natural Fire Plan 2000) ...................................................................................................................................... 216 Figure 58. Existing conditions and flame length on Monroe Mountain .............................................................. 217 Figure 59. Flame length. Options 1 and 2 proposed treatment areas within 1 mile of private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. .............................................. 228 Figure 60. Flame length after all proposed treatments are completed. .............................................................. 230 Figure 61. Spotting distance. Options 1 and 2 proposed treatment areas within 1 mile of private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. .......................... 230 Figure 62. Spotting capable of producing embers that could develop spot fires on private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. .............................................. 231 Figure 63. After all proposed treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with the distance the embers could travel that could start spot fires. ........................................................... 232 Figure 64. Crown fire/surface fire within 1 mile of private land that could result from prescribed fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. .......................... 233 Figure 65. Crown fire/surface fire after all proposed treatments are completed. .............................................. 234 Figure 66. Fire Activity Index within 1 mile of private land that could result from prescribed fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. .............................................. 235 Figure 67. Fire Activity Index within 1 mile of private land that could result from prescribed fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. .............................................. 235 Figure 68. Flame length after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. ............ 237 Figure 69. After all, past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel that could develop spot fires. ............ 237 Figure 70. Crown fire/surface fire after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. ............................................................................................................................................................... 238 Figure 71. Fire Activity Index after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. .... 239 Figure 72. Project area HUC6 map and cumulative effects area (see text for additional description). ........... 254 Figure 73. Stream fisheries resources on Monroe Mountain .............................................................................. 264 Figure 74. Mapped key boreal toad habitat ........................................................................................................... 265 Figure 75. Boreal toad locations mapped over aerial photos and vegetation maps with 300-foot streamside and 900-foot breeding site buffers (2003 through 2004 data with original 2000 Monroe Mountain EIS project buffer zones). This map shows heavy toad use along a small unmapped (in corporate GIS dataset) perennial stream northeast of the lake. ........................................................................ 273 Figure 76. This map shows the importance of the larger buffer around an important breeding lake ............. 273 Figure 77. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 2 .......................................................................................... 289 Figure 78. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watershed, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 3 .................................................................................................. 290 Figure 79. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 4 .......................................................................................... 291 Figure 80. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 5 .......................................................................................... 292 Figure 81. Riparian buffer effects on microclimate (from FEMAT 1993, Chapter 5) .......................................... 294 Figure 82. Riparian forest effects on streams (from FEMAT 1993 Chapter 5) ................................................... 295 Figure 83. Radio marked toad distance to flowing or standing water during summer 2003 and 2004 on the Forest (from Goates 2004). .................................................................................................................. 327 Figure 84. Deer trend data for central Utah including Monroe Mountain (Greenwood 2014) ........................... 364 Figure 85. Deer post-season trend data for central Utah including Monroe Mountain (Greenwood 2013) ..... 365 Figure 86. Deer winter range on Monroe Mountain. ............................................................................................. 366 Figure 87. Aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain .............................................................................................. 374 Figure 88. Aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain .............................................................................................. 374 Figure 89. Unsuccessful treatment on Monroe Mountain. There is no aspen regeneration left because it was grazed off. ............................................................................................................................................. 375 Tables Table 1. Summary of elk, mule deer, cattle, and sheep Animal Unit Months (AUMs) since the early 1910s. This table correlates with Figure 5 above. ................................................................................................. 8 Table 2. Current and desired aspen stand structure in areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer .............................................................................................................................................. 12 Table 3. Current and desired vegetation structural stage (VSS) for aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir stands; DBH = diameter at breast height ................................................................................................. 13 Table 4. Classification of 58 stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data for these stands was collected in 2013. ........................................................................................................................................................ 16 Table 5. Analysis by vegetation cover type for Monroe Mountain. This table originated from the Fishlake National Forest’s Prescribed Natural Fire Plan (USFS 1998), updated in 2000, and again in 2014. All numbers (with the exception of the Fire Frequency, which is in years) are by 1,000 acres (e.g., The Area in Historic Condition (200 to 400 years ago) for spruce/fir/mixed conifer is 7,000 acres). ......... 22 Table 6. Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) Management Areas (MAs) within the project area ............................................................................................................................... 33 Table 7. Option 1—Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands .................................................................................... 41 Table 8. Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands .................................................................................... 42 Table 9. Proposed prescribed fire treatments. ....................................................................................................... 43 Table 10. Proposed annual browse thresholds ...................................................................................................... 56 Table 11. Summary of potential livestock exclosures ........................................................................................... 62 Table 12. Alternative 2; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 68 Table 13. Alternative 2; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 68 Table 14. Alternative 2 acreage and percentage by the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain ........................................................................ 69 Table 15. Alternative 2 acreage and temporary road mileage ............................................................................... 69 Table 16. Alternative 2 acreage by dominant vegetative type ............................................................................... 70 Table 17. Alternative 2 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage and percent treated. ..................................... 70 Table 18. Alternative 2 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. ...................... 76 Table 19. Alternative 2 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only............................................................................. 76 Table 20. Alternative 3; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 78 Table 21. Alternative 3; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 78 Table 22. Alternative 3 acreage and percentage of the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain ..................................................................................... 79 Table 23. Alternative 3 acreage and temporary road mileage ............................................................................... 80 Table 24. Alternative 3 acreage by dominant vegetative type ............................................................................... 80 Table 25. Alternative 3 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage and percent treated. ..................................... 86 Table 26. Alternative 3 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. ...................... 86 Table 27. Alternative 3 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only............................................................................. 87 Table 28. Alternative 4; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 89 Table 29. Alternative 4; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 89 Table 30. Alternative 4 acreage and percentage of the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain ..................................................................................... 90 Table 31. Alternative 4 acreage and temporary road mileage ............................................................................... 91 Table 32. Alternative 4 acreage by dominant vegetative type ............................................................................... 91 Table 33. Alternative 4 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage and percent treated. ..................................... 91 Table 34. Alternative 4 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. ...................... 97 Table 35. Alternative 4 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only............................................................................. 97 Table 36. Alternative 5; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ........................................................................ 99 Table 37. Alternative 5; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands ...................................................................... 100 Table 38. Alternative 5 acreage and percentage of the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain ................................................................................... 101 Table 39. Alternative 5 acreage and temporary road mileage ............................................................................. 101 Table 40. Alternative 5 acreage by dominant vegetative type ............................................................................. 101 Table 41. Alternative 5 Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRA) acreage and percent treated. ................................. 107 Table 42. Alternative 5 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. .................... 107 Table 43. Alternative 5 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only........................................................................... 108 Table 44. Comparison of alternatives by acreages and miles of temporary roads ........................................... 109 Table 45. Comparison of alternatives by dominant vegetative type ................................................................... 109 Table 46. Comparison of Alternatives by LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain ........................................................ 110 Table 47. Comparison of Alternatives by Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) ...................................................... 111 Table 48. Comparison of Alternatives by draft UUA ............................................................................................ 113 Table 49. IRA and draft UUA Acreage Overlap ..................................................................................................... 114 Table 50. Number of Goshawk nest areas (NAs) and post-fledgling areas (PFAs) being mechanically treated ................................................................................................................................................................... 115 Table 51. General descriptions of existing Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) on Monroe Mountain (USFS 1983). ......................................................................................................................................................... 129 Table 52. General descriptions of existing draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) on Monroe Mountain ................................................................................................................................................................... 130 Table 53. Existing IRA system roads and trails .................................................................................................... 130 Table 54. Existing IRA non-system roads ............................................................................................................. 131 Table 55. Existing draft UUA system roads and trails ......................................................................................... 131 Table 56. Existing draft UUA non-system roads .................................................................................................. 132 Table 57. Existing IRA human developments and structures ............................................................................. 133 Table 58. Existing draft UUA human developments and structures ................................................................... 134 Table 59. Existing IRA Wilderness quality or attributes. The overall ratings are taken from the RAREII evaluation of roadless areas (USFS 1979). ............................................................................................ 136 Table 60. Existing IRA roadless characteristics ................................................................................................... 139 Table 61. Existing draft UUA wilderness quality or attributes. The overall ratings are taken from the 2004 Fishlake National Forest draft Undeveloped Area Evaluation. ............................................................ 144 Table 62. Existing draft UUA roadless characteristics ........................................................................................ 148 Table 63. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) analysis ............................................................................................ 153 Table 64. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) analysis (Continued) ....................................................................... 153 Table 65. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 2 by vegetation type .............................................................................................................. 154 Table 66. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 3 by vegetation type .............................................................................................................. 155 Table 67. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 4 by vegetation type .............................................................................................................. 156 Table 68. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and prescribed fire in alternative 5 by vegetation type ......................................................................................................................................... 158 Table 69. Langdon IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives ................................ 159 Table 70. Langdon Inventoried Roadless Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives. ....... 161 Table 71. Little Creek Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 164 Table 72. Little Creek Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effect to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................... 166 Table 73. Marysvale Peak Inventoried Roadless Area (IR) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 167 Table 74. Marysvale Peak Inventoried Roadless Area - Effect to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ................................................................................................................................................................... 169 Table 75. Signal Peak Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 171 Table 76. Signal Peak Inventoried Roadless Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ... 173 Table 77. Tibadore Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 175 Table 78. Tibadore Inventoried Roadless Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ........ 177 Table 79. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) analysis ............................................................................. 179 Table 80. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) analysis (continued) ........................................................ 179 Table 81. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 2 by vegetation type ................................................................................................... 180 Table 82. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 3 by vegetation type ................................................................................................... 181 Table 83. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning and Prescribed fire in alternative 4 by vegetation type ................................................................................................... 182 Table 84 Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 5 by vegetation type. .................................................................................................. 184 Table 85. Langdon draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area - effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 185 Table 86. Langdon draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 187 Table 87. Little Creek draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives .................................................................................................................................... 189 Table 88. Little Creek draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 191 Table 89. Marysvale Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives .......................................................................................................................................... 193 Table 90. Marysvale Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 195 Table 91. Signal Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives .................................................................................................................................... 197 Table 92. Signal Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 199 Table 93. Tibadore draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives .......................................................................................................................................... 201 Table 94. Tibadore draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 203 Table 95. Mechanical treatment acres in Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) and draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) by alternative .................................................................................................................... 205 Table 96. Fire suppression interpretations of lame length compared to safety (Andrews and Rothermel 1982). ................................................................................................................................................................... 210 Table 97. Fire size class and cause class rating categories for wildland fire .................................................... 213 Table 98. Past, present, and reasonably foreseeable Brushsaw, Dixie Harrow, and Harvest treatments ....... 221 Table 99. Past, present and reasonably foreseeable prescribed fires ............................................................... 223 Table 100. Past wildfires ......................................................................................................................................... 224 Table 101. Vegetation affected by alternatives, percentage and acres treated compared to the analysis area ................................................................................................................................................................... 245 Table 102. Percent of Nest Replacement Areas (NAs) affected by each alternative ......................................... 247 Table 103. Percent of Post-Fledgling Areas affected by each alternative .......................................................... 248 Table 104. Suitability of habitat for Intermountain Region sensitive aquatic species found in the project area ................................................................................................................................................................... 257 Table 105. Names and status of aquatic Management Indicator Species (MIS) known or suspected to occur in the project area, as well as suitable habitat. See UDWR web page for current stocking information. The information here was verified on the 2014 stocking page. In addition, to the species listed in this table, native BVCT are stocked into Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake (see Table 104 above) and sterile hybrid tiger trout are stocked into upper and lower Box Creek reservoirs and Barney Lake. ............................................................................................................................................. 263 Table 106. Monroe Mountain aquatic macroinvertebrate biotic condition index (BCI) summary table. Note: Older BCI data for the table is found in Mangum (various dates) and Vinson (various dates). These reports are on file at the Fishlake National Forest Supervisor’s Office in Richfield, Utah. Sample results for 2-10 are in a spreadsheet from the Utah State University Bug Lab, which is included in the project record. ................................................................................................................................... 285 Table 107. Proposed fire and mechanical vegetation treatments by subwatershed (modified HUC6 and HUC7s used for aquatic analysis) by alternative. ................................................................................. 288 Table 108. Hydrological disturbance rating developed from Solt 2015 (appendix J in this EIS). Note: Alternatives ranked 1 through 5 with 1 being least impacts, 5 greatest. Solt 2015 (appendix J in this EIS) did not include the no action alternative in the table; it was added to Table 9 and Tables K-1 and K-2 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) for the synthesis for consistence with other tables in the report. ............................................................................................................................................. 302 Table 109. Fire Effects to Fisheries – S. Utah 2000-2014 (excludes Pine Valley Mountains). This table shows the percentage burned at the HUC-6 level, although the pour point used for the table might be slightly modified from the HUC boundary to the point of diversion or lower extent of the fish population. Percentage burn is for the modified boundary. ............................................................... 307 Table 110. Proposed treatment percentages by subwatershed summarized from Table 106. ......................... 309 Table 111. ERA percentage by sub-watersheds by alternative. TOC = Threshold of Concern ...................... 314 Table 112. Change in ERA level due to application of treatment of only 15 percent of a HUC6 ...................... 315 Table 113. Summary of visual spatial review of proposed actions in relation to aquatic resources (see Apendix C from Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) for maps used in this review) ...................... 317 Table 114. Partners for Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) and Utah Conservation Partnership (UCP) habitat management guideline consistency with Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration project alternatives ............................................................................................................................................... 321 Table 115. Percentage of boreal toad habitat proposed for treatment by subwatershed (created by using GIS to overlay project areas (summarized in Table 106) and mapped boreal toad habitat). .................... 329 Table 116. Boreal toad habitat road density with temporary roads proposed by subwatershed (summarized from GIS subwatershed, boreal toad habitat, and motorized routs within boreal toad habitat tables). ................................................................................................................................................................... 330 Table 117. Overall synthesis score/ranking .......................................................................................................... 332 Table 118. Synthesis score by HUC ...................................................................................................................... 332 Table 119. Relative ranking (1 least impact-5 most impact) determined by synthesis score by HUC ............. 333 Table 120. Determination of impact on the affected sensitive species .............................................................. 350 Table 123. Estimated elk populations on Monroe Mountain Management Unit (UDWR) .................................. 357 Table 124. Vegetation affected by alternatives, percentages, and acres treated compared to the analysis area ................................................................................................................................................................... 359 Table 125. Estimated deer population on Monroe Mountain Management Unit (UDWR).................................. 362 Table 126. Alternative comparison table for livestock grazing ........................................................................... 373 Table 127. Current percentage of forested acres of old growth in areas proposed for treatments ................. 389 Table 128. Old growth for alternative 1 - no action .............................................................................................. 390 Table 129. Old growth comparison between alternatives 1 and 2 ...................................................................... 391 Table 130. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 2 ............................................................................ 392 Table 131. Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 3 ..................................................... 392 Table 132. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 3 ............................................................................ 393 Table 133. Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 4 ..................................................... 393 Table 134. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 4 ............................................................................ 394 Table 135. Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 5 ..................................................... 394 Table 136. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 5 ............................................................................ 395 Table 137. All alternatives old growth comparison .............................................................................................. 395 Table 138. DEIS preparers and contributors......................................................................................................... 399 1 PURPOSE AND NEED FOR ACTION 1.1 Introduction The Fishlake National Forest (Forest), Richfield Ranger District (District) has prepared this final environmental impact statement (FEIS) to comply with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), National Forest Management Act (NFMA), and other relevant Federal and State laws and regulations. The direct, indirect, and cumulative environmental impacts to the biological, physical, and social resources that may occur from implementing restoration activities are disclosed in this FEIS. This document is organized as follows:  Chapter 1. Purpose and Need for Action: The chapter includes information on the history of the project proposal, the purpose of and need for the project, and the agency’s proposal for achieving that purpose and need, and how the Forest Service informed the public of the proposal and how the public responded. In addition, this chapter includes the issues identified during the scoping process that will be evaluated during this FEIS process.  Chapter 2. Proposed Action and Alternatives: This chapter provides a more detailed description of the agency’s proposed action, how the action alternatives were developed, as well as alternative methods considered for achieving the stated purpose. This section also provides tables that compare the alternatives and show the environmental consequences associated with each alternative. This discussion also includes project design criteria.  Chapter 3. Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences: This chapter describes the current condition and the environmental effects of accomplishing the proposed action and alternatives. The analysis is organized by the issues identified in section 1.15.  Chapter 4. Consultation and Coordination: This chapter provides a list of preparers, individuals, and agencies consulted during the development of the FEIS.  Appendices. The appendix consists of multiple parts and provides detailed information to support the analysis:  • Appendix A - modeled photos depicting current and post-treatment conditions. • Appendix B - the consistency documentation for the Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group’s (UFRWG) Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah (UFRWG 2010). • Appendix C - Monroe Mountain Working Group’s 2014 Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain (MMWG 2014). • Appendix D – comments received during the 45-day public comment period and the Fishlake National Forest’s responses. • Appendix E – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Air Quality Report (Chappell 2015). • Appendix F – Aquatic Specialist Report for Sensitive and MIS Aquatic Species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project (Whelan 2015). • Appendix G – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Cultural/Heritage Resources Specialist Report (Leonard 2014). • Appendix H – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Botany Specialist Report (Tait 2014). • Appendix I – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Fire Ecology/Fire/Fuels Specialist Report (Chappell et al. 2015). • Appendix J – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Hydrology/Soils Specialist Report (Solt 2015). • Appendix K – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Inventoried Roadless & Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas Specialist Report (Christensen 2015a). • Appendix L – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resources Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). • Appendix M – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Recreation Specialist Report (Christensen 2015b). • Appendix N – Vegetation and Climate Change Specialist Report (Holsclaw 2015). • Appendix O – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Visual Quality Specialist Report (Christensen 2015c). • Appendix P – Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Wildlife Specialist Report (Rasmussen 2015). • Appendix Q – Wildlife Biological Assessment and Evaluation • Appendix R – Aquatics Biological Assessment and Evaluation  Additional documentation, including the complete analyses for each resource, may be found in the project record located at the Fishlake National Forest Supervisor’s Office, Richfield Ranger District, 115 East 900 North, Richfield, Utah 84701. All specialists’ reports are included as appendices to this document and are also posted on the Forest’s website at www.fs.usda.gov/projects/fishlake/landmanagement/projects. Paper copies of the specialists’ reports are available upon request at the same address. 1.2 Project-Level Pre-decisional Administrative Review Process This project was posted on the Forest’s schedule of proposed actions website on October 1, 2012 and was subject to the appeal requirements at 36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 215. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2012 includes a provision (Section 428) directing the Department of Agriculture Secretary to establish a pre-decisional objection process for projects and activities implementing land management plans in lieu of 36 CFR 215, the post-decisional appeal process used by the agency since 1993. As directed by Section 428, the Project-Level Pre-decisional Administrative Review Process regulations (36 CFR 218) were revised. These regulations apply to projects and activities implementing land management plans documented with a Record of Decision. Although this project was initiated under the 36 CFR 215 regulations, the Record of Decision is subject to the 36 CFR 218 regulations.  The key difference between the 36 CFR 215 regulations and the 36 CFR 218 regulations is that the 36 CFR 218 regulations requires the circulation of a draft decision document with the final environmental impact statement; a step that is not required by the NEPA or the Council on Environmental Quality regulations (40 CFR 1500). This would allow for a pre-decisional review process where the public can seek higher-level review of unresolved concerns before the project decision has been signed. Preparation and circulation of a draft decision document with the environmental analysis document enables the responsible official to notify the public of the intended decision and the rationale for that decision. In turn, the public is provided with an opportunity to raise any concerns with the decision before it is signed, allowing those concerns to be considered by the responsible official, and reviewing officer, as part of the administrative review process.  The Forest Service believes that considering public concerns before a decision is made aligns with a collaborative approach to public land management and increases the likelihood of resolving those concerns resulting in better, more informed decisions. It is also believed that this would aid in the effort to be more efficient with documenting environmental effects. 1.3 Background and Historic Conditions Monroe Mountain, located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale, encompasses approximately 175,706 acres of National Forest lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings (Figure 1).  Of these 175,706 acres, quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres on Monroe Mountain (Figure 2). Soil survey information was used to estimate the historic occurrence of aspen. It is widely recognized that aspen ecosystems are capable of supporting one of the largest arrays of plant and animal species due to its high productivity and structural diversity. However, it is also widely recognized that aspen ecosystems have been in decline throughout the Intermountain West during the twentieth century (UFRWG 2010).  On Monroe Mountain, unsustainable aspen ecosystem conditions include, but are not limited to,  1. Conifer encroachment due to a reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression; and, 2. Lack of aspen recruitment due to domestic and wild browsing by cattle, sheep, elk, and deer.  Reduced occurrences of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and overbrowsing by domestic and wild browsers have been identified by the District as the primary underlying causes for aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain being at risk. Aspen of 5 to 15 feet in height (“recruitment”) are uncommon on Monroe Mountain, despite continued sprouting of aspen (“regeneration”). Due to high cost and continual maintenance, fencing is not Figure 1. Project vicinity map  4% 40% 2% 7% 9% 5% 3% 30% Spruce-Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Sagebrush/Grass/Forbs      Figure 2. Monroe Mountain historic (200 to 400 years ago) vegetation distribution  a long-term sustainable response option for protecting aspen sprouts from overbrowsing, and does not address underlying causes of the lack of recruitment.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mountain. Aspen ecosystems support the highest level of biodiversity for interior western forests and the productivity of aspen ecosystem understories (grass, forbs, and shrubs) is higher than all other forest types. Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers and are relatively short-lived (i.e., 100 to 200 years). Aspen is shade intolerant and sprouts heavily following disturbance, such as fire, and benefits from disturbance especially where conifer currently shades and competes with aspen. Mechanical treatments can also be an effective disturbance tool for aspen restoration.  Aspen-mixed conifer communities on Monroe Mountain developed with fire as a historical disturbance process. Published multi-century fire histories for Monroe Mountain and five regional landscapes with similar topography and vegetation reveal patterns of abundant fire prior to Euro-American settlement in the mid to late-1800s (Heyerdahl et al. 2011). For four sites, stand demographics, surface fire frequency, and fire severity were characterized for plots arranged in grids to represent a broad range in elevation and vegetation type within small watersheds. Aspen was found in 62 percent (59 of 95) of the study plots. Of these, 53 percent were classified in low to mixed severity fire classes with short to moderate fire-free intervals while the remaining plots were classified as having high fire severity and assumed longer intervals. Fire-scarred ponderosa pine trees (Pinus ponderosa) sampled on Old Woman Plateau revealed a consistent pattern of frequent surface fire from the 1500s to the late 1800s. This site is located approximately 40 miles northeast of Monroe Mountain and like much of the eastcentral and southern portions of Monroe Mountain is characterized by gentle terrain with small stands of aspen separated by openings of mostly non-forested sagebrush steppe.  Reported fire evidence from Monroe Mountain was limited to 10 fire-scarred ponderosa pine trees sampled from across a large portion of the mountain. Although ponderosa pine is an excellent species for preserving long records of surface fire, it is an uncommon species on Monroe Mountain and as such is not sufficiently abundant to drive fuels and fire dynamics. However, the short to moderate fire frequency evident from the sampled trees (Figure 3) is supported by widespread evidence of past fire in the form of fire-injured Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and Engelmann spruce trees (Picea engelmannii; including multiple injuries per tree; Figure 4) and charred remnants. Collectively, this site-specific evidence and data from the intensively sampled regional sites support an interpretation of historic fire-regimes that included a range of short to long fire-free intervals and low to high fire severity, creating and maintaining a diverse and dynamic vegetation mosaic across time and space. These spatially complex fire regimes ended within decades of Euro-American settlement. As a result, diversity was lost as forest communities became dominated by late seral1 conditions. In mixed stands, aspen cover and viability decreased due to the lack of disturbance over the past 150 plus years. Although persistent or stable2 aspen (little or no conifer present) may not be dependent upon periodic fire for regeneration, the evidence suggests that fire was sufficiently abundant across these montane landscapes such that even these conifer-free aspen communities were likely exposed to fire periodically. 1 A seral aspen community may have some aspen in the overstory, but mostly it is a community where conifer is becoming the doiminant species. 2 A stable aspen community has a predominantly aspen overstory with little to no conifer regeneration. 3 Animal Unit (AU) is one mature (1,000 pound) cow or the equivalent based upon an average daily forage consumption of 26 pounds of dry matter per day. Animal Unit Month (AUM) is the amount of feed or forage required by an animal unit for 1 month. The forage requirement of both adults and offspring should be considered (Forest Service Handbook 2209.15).  Historically, livestock (cattle and sheep) use on Monroe Mountain was much higher than current use (Figure 5). Reductions in livestock animal unit months3 (AUMs) started in the 1920 and 1930s with continued reductions through the 1970s. Sheep AUMs have decreased slightly since the 1970s and cattle AUMs have increased slightly since the 1970s.  Few records exist indicating the number of mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) that were present on Monroe Mountain prior to the 1930s. Deer AUMs in Figure 5 and Table 1 are rough estimates between the 1930s and 1970s.  With the exception of 2000, deer AUMs have gradually decreased from the 1960s through 2010. Deer AUMs increased slightly in 2014. Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus) AUMs have steadily increased from the 1970s through 2000 then had a reduction in 2010 and then a slight increase in 2014. Winter counts were used to calculate elk AUMs; therefore, actual summer elk AUMs may be higher than what is displayed in Figure 5 and Table 1, assuming summer elk numbers are higher than winter elk numbers on Monroe Mountain.  Figure 3. Chronologies of surface fires at Monroe Mountain, sampled over an approximately 35-mile north south transect. Each horizontal line indicates the length of record for a single tree. The short vertical lines indicate years when that tree had a fire scar. Recorder years (solid lines) generally follow the first scar on each tree. Non-recorder years (dashed lines) precede the formation of the first scar on each tree, but also occur when a period of the fire record was consumed by subsequent fires or decay. Inner and outer dates are the dates of the earliest or latest rings sampled for trees where pith or bark was not sampled (Heyerdahl et al. 2011).  Figure 4. Fire-scarred Engelmann spruce, with evidence of three separate fires near Monkey Flat Ridge, Monroe Mountain (photo credit Stan Kitchen).    For example, the UDWR knows a portion of the elk herd that summer on Monroe Mountain leave the mountain during the winter months and utilize winter ranges on adjoining units. Although Figure 5 and Table 1 shows total AUMs in 2014 are similar to total AUMs in 1910, the 1910 AUMs displayed in Figure 5 and Table 1 are likely conservative because mule deer AUMs are not included. In 1910, the AUMs were cattle, sheep, and an unknown number of mule deer, while in 2014 the AUMs were cattle, sheep, deer, and elk. All of these species browse aspen. 1.4 Existing and Desired Conditions This analysis utilizes vegetative structural stage4 (VSS), tree height, stand density, and key habitat components as criteria to describe existing and desired conditions for forest structure in the project area. 4 The vegetative structural stage integrates the stages that vegetation complexes (e.g., composition, structure) go through beginning with regeneration through maturation and mortality. (Oliver and Larsen 1990; Franklin et al., 2002; Thomas et al. 1979). MON_firechart  Figure 5. Summary of elk, mule deer, cattle, and sheep Animal Unit Months (AUMs) since the early 1900s. Deer AUMs are unknown for 1910 and 1920.  Table 1. Summary of elk, mule deer, cattle, and sheep Animal Unit Months (AUMs) since the early 1910s. This table correlates with Figure 5 above. Year Sheep AUMs Cattle AUMs Mule Deer AUMs Elk AUMs 1910 8,513 14,851 Not Surveyed Not Surveyed 1920 7,501 14,020 Not Surveyed Not Surveyed 1930 6,373 5,887 3,685 Not Surveyed 1940 5,446 4,664 8,597 Not Surveyed 1950 2,935 6,126 8,597 Not Surveyed 1960 3,424 4,754 21,016 Not Surveyed 1970 2,584 5,186 16,785 257 1980 2,124 6,877 12,145 2,573 1990 2,121 6,458 9,143 5,146 2000 1,763 7,731 10,781 9,133 2010 1,780 7,750 6,687 5,403 2014 1,930 7,086 9,146 6,301  Aspen-dominated cover (stable aspen) currently occurs on approximately 17,009 acres (Figure 6 and Figure 8). Much of this stable aspen has a component of mixed conifer in the understory (primarily subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa)). Approximately 31,129 acres are dominated by seral aspen; much of this seral aspen co-exists with mixed conifer (primarily subalpine fir). Approximately 5,210 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by mixed conifer (Engelmann spruce, Douglas fir, ponderosa pine, and white fir (A. concolor)). Much of this mixed conifer coexists with aspen. Approximately 13,667 acres are dominated by spruce/fir with an aspen component. Approximately 43,877 acres in the project area are dominated by sagebrush cover types (primarily big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata)), some (approximately 12,231 acres) of which may have been aspen communities in the recent past. Dominance by sagebrush is not a successional pathway for aspen; however, in the absence of recruitment, aspen can be replaced with shrub cover types. These sagebrush-dominated communities still have some scattered aspen trees/stands.  The desired condition as outlined in this document is specific to Monroe Mountain and was developed by the District; it is consistent with the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP; USFS 1986). The desired condition is to have functioning stable and seral aspen communities, with multi-height stems (as described in Table 2) and adequate recruitment to perpetuate aspen communities, including site-appropriate, biodiverse understories. Big sagebrush, if present would be a minor component of the aspen community. Fire regimes would be adequate to perpetuate aspen, particularly in areas seral to conifer. Table 2 describes the current and desired aspen stand structure for areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer.    Figure 6. Monroe Mountain existing vegetation distribution  Aspen sprouts are defined as aspen less than 6 feet in height, aspen saplings are defined as aspen 6 to 12 feet in height, and aspen recruits are defined as aspen greater than 12 feet in height. For seral aspen stands, the disparity between the existing and desired condition is great. The existing condition describes 592 sprouts per acre compared to 10,000 to 20,000 sprouts per acre as described in the desired condition. Similarly, the existing condition describes 119 saplings per acre while the desired condition describes approximately 1,000 to 2,000 saplings per acre. 16% 29% 1% 7% 8% 4% 6% 29% Spruce-Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Sagebrush/Grass/Forbs Lastly, the existing condition describes 276 recruits per acre, while the desired condition is 400 to 600 recruits per acre (Table 2). Similar results occur for aspen in the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Table 2). Accomplishing these 10,000 to 20,000, 1,000 to 2,000, and 400 to 600 sprouts, saplings, and recruits per acre would result in achieving the desired conditions described above of having persistent aspen communities with multi height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate aspen communities, including site-appropriate, biodiverse understories.  The existing vegetation distribution (Figure 6) shows approximately 29 percent of Monroe Mountain is dominated by spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen while approximately 10 percent is dominated by aspen. As shown in (Figure 7), the desire is to have more areas dominated by aspen and fewer areas dominated by spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen.    Figure 7. Monroe Mountain desired vegetation distribution  Vegetation structural stage is a method of describing forest age and tree size from seedling to old forests. The VSS classification is based on the tree size class and is an indication of the dominant tree diameter distribution. A group of trees with a single age class is considered evenaged (usually defined as seral) while a group of trees with multiple age classes is uneven-aged (usually classified as stable).  Table 3 describes the existing and desired VSS for stable and seral aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir stands.  Figure 8. Existing vegetation on Monroe Mountain    Table 2. Current and desired aspen stand structure in areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer   Aspen Sprouts/Acre (<6 feet in height) Aspen Saplings/Acre (6-12 feet in height) Aspen Recruits/Acre (>12 feet in height)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Seral Stands 0 3,286 592 0 911 119 59 615 276 Spruce/Fir Stands 0 4,433 1,121 0 183 38 0 301 137 Mixed Conifer Stands 0 1,255 677 0 233 108 0 286 117 Desired Condition5 Aspen Structure After Implementation of Mechanical and/or Prescribed Fire Treatments 5,000 No Max 10,000 to 20,000 1,000 No Max 1,000 to 2,000 400 No Max 400 to 600 5 These numbers demonstrate that the desired condition of having aspen communities with multi-height stems with adequate recruitment to prepetuate the aspen communities are being met. 6 Diameter at breast height is a standard method of expressing the diameter of the trunk or bole of a standing tree, measured at the height of an adult’s breast (an average of 4.6 feet above ground in the United States).  The VSS as it is applied to Monroe Mountain describes the project area as being primarily in VSS 1, 2, and 3, while the desired condition for stable and seral aspen, mixed conifer and spruce/fir stands for VSS 4, 5, and 6 are not being achieved. (The original calibration for VSS assumes that Ponderosa pine is the dominant old growth species. Monroe Mountain has approximately 209 acres of Ponderosa pine scattered throughout the project area (Figure 8); however, the dominant conifer species in the project area are spruce and fir with a diameter at breast height6 (DBH) for older trees usually much less than the 24 plus inches that describes VSS 6. The larger and generally older aspen trees on Monroe Mountain are also usually smaller than 24 inch DBH.  Forest resiliency and diversity is dependent on the distribution of age and size classes and the capacity of an area. Most stands have some element of VSS 1 through VSS 6 in them; however, most of the forested acres in the project area lack sufficient age and size class diversity. This has resulted in a more uniform landscape with reduced resiliency. Having a better distribution of VSS 1 through 6 is expected to result in more persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems (as described in Table 2) and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities.  Data was collected from 58 stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data was collected on aspen overstory condition, aspen regeneration and recruitment (including browse use), fecal pellets, and cow pies.  Stable aspen is a term used to describe aspen stands in which conifer trees play little or no role. The stable aspen stands were classified into three broad categories based upon the density of living canopy trees. In addition to the dominant canopy trees, aspen recruits (greater than 12 feet tall but clearly below the dominant canopy), aspen saplings (6 to 12 feet tall and at low risk to being top-browsed), and aspen sprouts (less than 6 feet tall and at relatively high risk to being top-browsed) are also generally present.  Table 3. Current and desired vegetation structural stage (VSS) for aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir stands; DBH = diameter at breast height   VSS 1: Grass-Forb/Shrub (DBH: 0-1 inch) VSS 2: Seedling-Sapling (DBH: 1-5 inches") VSS 3: Young Forest (DBH: 5-12 inches)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Stable Stands 19% 24% 22% 6% 36% 23% 40% 63% 50% Aspen: Seral Stands 0% 18% 13% 5% 47% 15% 37% 82% 58% Mixed Conifer Stands 8% 17% 13% 5% 37% 20% 24% 52% 42% Spruce/Fir Stands 4% 20% 13% 7% 26% 16% 23% 63% 41% Desired Condition All Stands **** **** 10% **** **** 10% **** **** 20%              VSS 4: Mid-Aged Forest (DBH: 12-18 inches) VSS 5: Mature Forest (DBH: 18-24 inches) VSS 6: Old Forest (DBH: 24 plus inches)   Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Min Max Ave Current Condition Aspen: Stable Stands 0% 11% 5% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Aspen: Seral Stands 0% 32% 13% 0% 5% 1% 0% 5% 0% Mixed Conifer Stands 6% 43% 19% 2% 6% 4% 0% 5% 2% Spruce/Fir Stands 4% 31% 21% 0% 14% 6% 0% 13% 2% Desired Condition All Stands **** **** 20% **** **** 20% **** **** 20%  The stable aspen stands were further subdivided the three primary classes based upon the perceived ability of these stands to continually, or periodically, replace canopy trees over time through vegetation recruitment. The sub-divisions listed in order of decreasing health are labeled as full (F) for fully self-replacing; transitional (T), with recruitment levels that are borderline to those necessary for self-replacement; marginal (M), where recruitment is happening but at a level that might not be sufficient for self-replacement; and non-self-replacing (N) where recruitment is not happening, or is at a level that is clearly too low to maintain the stand through time.  Dense stands of canopy trees occurs when initial sucker density is high and browse pressure is low following a disturbance, such as fire or mechanical treatments. In these stands, mature-tree densities often exceed 1,000 canopy trees per acre. The density and relative health of these relatively young stands suppress further root suckering and growth (except at stand edges) for several decades until the stand self-thins as individual trees die, opening up the canopy. Therefore, there should be no minimum expectation for saplings or sprouts as a measure of stand health for this class. Stable aspen stands with greater than 1000 canopy trees per acre (Figure 10) are therefore classified as high density Stable Aspen Class 1 (SA1) and are considered selfreplacing regardless of the presence or absence of saplings or sprouts. It should be noted that SA1 stands do not persist indefinitely, but would eventually transition to SA2 or SA3 classes as trees thin. As this occurs, smaller-sized trees are used for classification as explained below. Only one of 58 Monroe Mountain stable aspen monitoring stands was classified as SA1 in 2013 (Table 4).  At the opposite end of the spectrum for canopy tree density is the low density Stable Aspen Class 2 (SA2) with canopy tree densities of less than 200 trees per acre (Figure 9; Figure 11 through Figure 14). Healthy stands produce abundant sprouts resulting in sufficient saplings and aspen recruits to ensure replacement in the absence of excessive browse pressure. When browsing is excessive, sprouts are not able to grow sufficiently high to escape browsing (even when sprout density is high), and recruitment into the sapling and recruit size classes does not occur or is insufficient to maintain a healthy aspen stand through time. As these stands remain open (high levels of light) over time, competitive shrubs such as big sagebrush invade the understory and compete with aspen sprouts for limited resources further complicating recovery. Within this classification, stand status is further assigned based upon the combined density of saplings and recruits, independent of sprout density. Aspen stands with greater than two times the number of canopy trees in the saplings and recruits are considered fully self-replacing (Figure 11). Stands with saplings and recruits less than two times but greater than one time the number of canopy trees are classified as transitional (Figure 12). Stands with saplings and recruits less than one time but greater than one-half time the number of canopy trees are classified as marginal (Figure 13) and stands with saplings and recruits less than one-half the number of canopy trees are classified as non-self-replacing (Figure 14). In 2013, 30 of the 58 aspen stands were classified as SA2 with a subclass breakdown of 5 in SA2-F, 3 in SA2-T, 7 in SA2-M, and 15 in SA2-N (Table 4).  An intermediate-density Stable Aspen Class (SA3) is defined by a density of 200 to 1000 canopy trees per acre; (Figure 9; Figure 15 through Figure 18) generally accepted as an indicator of a stand that is fully stocked. As is the case for SA2 stands, aspen sapling and recruit density is used for subclass assignment. Like the SA2 stands, as saplings and recruits decrease, SA3 classifications also decrease from fully self-replacing (Figure 15), transitional (Figure 16), and marginal (Figure 17), to non-self-replacing (Figure 18). In 2013, 27 of the 58 Monroe Mountain monitoring plots were classified as SA3 with a subclass breakdown of 5 in SA3-F, 2 in SA3-T, 6 in SA3-M, and 14 in SA3-N (Table 4).  Overall, in 2013, 11 of 58 (19 percent) stable aspen stands were classified as fully self-replacing, five (9 percent) as transitional, 13 (22 percent) as marginal and 29 (50 percent) as non-selfreplacing (Table 4). To move towards the desired conditions of having persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities, the desire is for the stable aspen stands to be in SA1, SA2-F, or SA3-F; therefore, 79 percent (47 stands) of the stable aspen stands need to improve.  Figure 9. Stable aspen monitoring sites   Table 4. Classification of 58 stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data for these stands was collected in 2013. Classification Number of Aspen Stands SA1 1 SA2 -F 5 SA2-T 3 SA2-M 7 SA2-N 15 SA3-F 5 SA3-T 2 SA3-M 6 SA3-N 14     Figure 10. High-density stable aspen (SA1) with 1200 aspen canopy trees per acre. The absence of smallsized trees is due to growth suppression by the dense over-story and should not be viewed as an indication of unhealthy condition.  Figure 11. Low-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as fully self-replacing (SA2- F). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 30 aspen recruits, 220 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.   Figure 12. Low-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as transitionally selfreplacing (SA2-T). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 15 aspen recruits, 110 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.  Figure 13. Low-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as marginally self-replacing (SA2-M). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 8 aspen recruits, 55 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.   Figure 14. Low-density stable aspen with insufficient small-trees to be capable of self-replacement (SA2-N). Canopy tree density is 100 trees per acre with 4 aspen recruits, 20 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.  Figure 15. Moderate-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as fully self-replacing (SA3-F). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 30 aspen recruits, 260 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.   Figure 16. Moderate-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as transitionally selfreplacing (SA3-T). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 15 aspen recruits, 130 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.  Figure 17. Moderate-density stable aspen with sufficient small-trees to be classified as marginally selfreplacing (SA3-M). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 8 aspen recruits, 65 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.   Figure 18. Moderate-density stable aspen with insufficient small-trees to be capable of self-replacement (SA3-N). Canopy tree density is 500 trees per acre with 4 aspen recruits, 32 saplings, and 5000 sprouts per acre.    Aspen understory data (species diversity and ground cover) was collected in 2013 and 2014 from 31 of the 58 sites (O’Brien 2015). Fourteen sites were surveyed in 2013 and 17 sites were surveyed in 2014. From the 14 sites monitored in 2013, sixty-one different species were identified. Of the 61 species, dandelion was encountered most often, followed by mountain snowberry and Kentucky bluegrass. Of the 61 species, six of the species were exotic while the other 55 species were native. From the 17 sites monitored in 2014, eighty-four different species were identified. Of the 84 species, Kentucky bluegrass and dandelion were the most common species encountered. Of the 84 species, like in 2013, six of the species were exotic while the other 78 species were native. Combining 2013 and 2014 data, the most common species found were Kentucky bluegrass and dandelion. The third most common species found was mountain snowberry, followed by Wood’s rose. Bare ground was not common, primarily due to litter, and secondarily due to Kentucky bluegrass and some sedge species. The presence of native species indicates potential for greater structure in the understory. As described in Chapter 2, baseline aspen understory conditions data would be collected from the remaining 27 sites. After baseline information is collected from all 58 sites, aspen understory conditions would continue to be monitored. As already described in Chapter 1, the desire is to have biodiverse aspen understories. For additional information regarding aspen understory conditions, see O’Brien 2015.  Largely due to a reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and overbrowsing, most of the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain presently do not meet the desired conditions described above. Most of the aspen stands on Monroe Mountain do not have multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the communities. Big sagebrush in several areas is a major component, and fire return intervals have not been adequate to perpetuate aspen in areas that are now seral to conifer. Sustainability of these diverse fireadapted aspen ecosystems will largely depend on the successful reintroduction of appropriate disturbance processes, and reduction in overbrowsing of aspen. Currently it is difficult for managers to allow fire to play a natural role in the ecosystem due to high stand densities, abundant fuel loading, the forest’s proximity to private property, and public and firefighter safety. The District desires that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (USFS 2001).  As stated above, the lack of aspen recruitment is, in part, due to domestic and wild browsing by cattle, sheep, elk, and deer. Figure 5 and Table 1 above outline the total AUMs for cattle, sheep, elk, and deer from 1910 through 2014. Data from 2014 indicate that there were 1,930 sheep and 7,086 cattle AUMs permitted on Monroe Mountain. Cattle and sheep are required to graze in specific allotments and pastures during certain times of the growing season. The numbers of AUMs for cattle and sheep on Monroe Mountain in 2014 are much lower compared to the period from 1910 to 1920.  Table 5. Analysis by vegetation cover type for Monroe Mountain. This table originated from the Fishlake National Forest’s Prescribed Natural Fire Plan (USFS 1998), updated in 2000, and again in 2014. All numbers (with the exception of the Fire Frequency, which is in years) are by 1,000 acres (e.g., The Area in Historic Condition (200 to 400 years ago) for spruce/fir/mixed conifer is 7,000 acres). Vegetative Cover Type Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other7 Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Sagebrush/ Grass/Forbs Totals8 Fire Frequency (Years)9 10-8010 20- 6011 5-25 20- 5012 10- 30 20- 50 10- 30 20-40  Area in Historic Condition (200-400 Years Ago) 1,000 Acres 7 71 3 13 15 8 5 53 175 Area in Existing Condition (As of Year 2000) 5013 1714 0 13 15 7 28 45 175 Net Change from Historical (+/-) 43 -54 -3 0 0 -1 23 -8 0 Area of Desired Condition (Start) 28 50 1 13 15 8 10 50 175 Area in PFC15 (-) 5 2 0 3 11 6 2 8 37 Area Not Suitable for Treatment (-) 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 3 Area Available for Treatment (=) 23 48 1 10 4 2 5 42 135 7 Cover type "Other" is a combination of alpine, mountain brush, riparian, and tall forb. 8 Totals may not be exact because of rounding to the nearest 1,000 acres. 9 These fire frequency years are averages. As described in section 1.3, fire severities varied between low, moderate, and high. Fire frequencies also varied from short, moderate, to long fire-free internals. These ranges are intended to reflect averages, acknowledging that some areas may have burned more often and some areas may have burned less often. 10Average fire frequencies for spruce/fir may be 10 to 50 years for white fir/Douglas fir and 50 to 80 years for spruce/subalpine fir. 11 Average fire frequencies for aspen may be 20 to 40 years at elevations less than 9,000 feet and 40 to 60 years greater than 9,000 feet. 12 The fire-adapted community most abundant in this group is mountain brush, which as a fire return interval similar to Gambel oak. 13 These 50,000 acres also includes seral aspen. 14 These 17,000 acres only include aspen dominated areas. 15 PFC stands for properly functioning condition – The on the ground condition termed PFC refers to how well the physical processes are functioning, PFC is a state of resiliency that will allow a riparian-wetland system to hold together during a 25 to 30 year flow event, sustaining that system’s ability to produce values related to both physical and biological attributes. It can provide information on whether a riparian-wetland area is physically functioning in a manner that will allow the maintenance or recovery of desired values, e.g. fish habitat, Neotropical birds, or forage, over time. Vegetative Cover Type Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other7 Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Sagebrush/ Grass/Forbs Totals8 1 4-12 Fire Frequency (Years)9 10-8010 20- 6011 5-25 20- 5012 10- 30 20- 50 10- 30 20-40  Range of Area to Treat in 5 Year Period16,.17 1-12 <1 1-2 <1 1-2 5-10 13- 42 1986 Through 1990 Wildland fire 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 Prescribed Fire 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.0 Other 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 1991 Through 1995 Wildland fire 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Prescribed Fire 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.5 Other 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 1.4 1996 Through 2000 Wildland fire 1.0 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 1.7 Prescribed Fire 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 1.1 1.6 Other 0.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 1.1 2.4 2001 Through 2005 Wildland fire 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 Prescribed Fire 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.9 Other 0.7 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.4 1.2 3.4 2005 Through 2010 Wildland fire 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.1 0.9 0.2 2.0 Prescribed Fire 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.3 Other 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 1.3 2011 Throu gh 2013 Wildland fire 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 2.0 16 A 5-year period is the minimum window for planning and monitoring in this analysis. 17 To calculate the range of area to treat in a 5-year period, divide the area available for treatment (e.g., prescribed fire) by each of the years given for the range in fire frequency and then multiply each quotient by 5 years. Prescribed Fire Vegetative Cover Type Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other7 Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Sagebrush/ Grass/Forbs Totals8 Fire Frequency (Years)9 10-8010 20- 6011 5-25 20- 5012 10- 30 20- 50 10- 30 20-40  0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 Acres Currently Being Implemented18 Prescribed Fire 3.1 1.0 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.4 1.0 3.7 10.6 Other 2.2 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.6 Total Area Treated Since 1986 or Currently Being Treated  12.2 3.3 0.0 0.6 1.6 0.7 4.5 11.7 34.6 Area Remaining for Initial Treatments 10.8 44.7 1.0 9.4 2.4 1.3 0.5 30.3 100.4 Initial Treatments Completed and Past the Shortest Fire Frequency Return Interval19  3.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.3 0.9 4.9 Maximum Area Proposed in the Aspen Restoration Project EIS  12.2 35.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 47.3 18Cove Area, Box Creek Fuels Reduction Project, Monument Peak Fuels Reduction Project, and Twin Peaks Fuels Reduction Project 19 Areas need to be retreated sometime within the fire frequency return interval to help facilitate staying in PFC. (e.g., pinyon/juniper: anything treated more than 10 years ago would meet this). Vegetative Cover Type Spruce/Fir/Mixed Conifer/Seral Aspen Aspen Dominated Ponderosa Pine Other7 Mahogany Gambel Oak Pinyon/Juniper Sagebrush/ Grass/Forbs Totals8 Fire Frequency (Years)9 10-8010 20- 6011 5-25 20- 5012 10- 30 20- 50 10- 30 20-40  Maximum Area Proposed in the Aspen Restoration Project EIS if Mechanical Treatments Occur and 60% of the Prescribed Fire Acres Get Burned20  9.0 27.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 36.3 20 The Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis) amendment (USFS 2000) require that 40 percent interlocking crown be maintained in foraging habitat. Prescribed fire would occur when 60 percent of the area would be expected to burn, maintaining 40 percent interlocking crowns and a mosaic burn pattern.  Data collected from aerial and ground surveys from 2014 indicates that there were approximately 9,146 deer and 6,301 elk AUMs on Monroe Mountain. Surveys for deer and elk are completed by the UDWR approximately annually. It is important to note that these numbers are estimated by taking the actual numbers counted and inserting them into a model or formula that compensates for those animals that may be missed during the physical surveys.  The UDWR currently has a winter population objective of 1,800 animals for the Monroe Mountain Elk Herd Unit. Populations are estimated annually utilizing harvest surveys, aerial flights, and population modeling. The current estimated winter population on Monroe Mountain Elk Herd Unit use portions of the aspen habitat on Monroe Mountain. From June through September elk tend to concentrate in certain areas of Monroe Mountain (Figure 5). Aspen occurs in much of the area used by elk in the summer. The highest concentration of elk tends to be in the central and north portion of the mountain (the area generally south of Big Lake and north of Langdon Mountain). Many of the aspen stands in this area appear to have heavy browsing pressure. Later in the fall, the elk tend to disperse, with a portion of the herd sometimes leaving Monroe Mountain entirely (MMWG 2012).  In August 2011, four (Tibadore, Burnt Flat, Squaw Springs, and White Ledges) 100-feet by 6- feet digital photographic trail camera belt transections were installed in aspen stands by Utah State University Extension Service. These transects were monitored until November 2012. Two cameras were installed at each transect, each facing each other, one at each end of the 100-foot transect for eight total cameras. Data from these cameras show that elk, deer, cattle, and sheep all browse aspen. Figure 19. Elk habitat on Monroe Mountain    These transects were also read multiple times for browse conditions. The monitoring results show the percent browse at the last reading in 2011 ranged from 13 percent (Tibadore) to 58 percent (Burnt Flat and Squaw Springs), with three of the four transects exhibiting 52 to 58 percent browse. In 2012, percent browse at the last reading ranged from 65 percent (Tibadore) to 91 percent (Burnt Flat). Tibadore exhibited the lowest browse among the four transects in the fall 2011 (13 percent) and 2012 (65 percent) (MMWG 2012). This aspen browse is attributed to cattle, sheep, elk, and deer. The desire is to sufficiently reduce the aspen browse from cattle, sheep, elk, and deer so that persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems, and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities can be achieved. 1.5 Purpose and Need for Action The purpose of this project is to restore aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain by achieving the desired conditions described above. To help accomplish this purpose, the District has identified a need to (1) address the conifer encroachment that occurs due to the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and (2) address aspen overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates. These are two of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. Restoring aspen communities on Monroe Mountain would result in multiple benefits, which include but are not limited to:  1. Improving and increasing the amount of habitat for wildlife species dependent upon aspen ecosystems (i.e., mule deer, elk, and Northern goshawk); 2. Improving and increasing the amount of habitat and forage for domestic ungulates (i.e., cattle and sheep); 3. Improving native species diversity; 4. Reducing hazardous fuel accumulations; 5. Reducing the risk for large-scale, intense wildland fires. This results in lower risk to the safety of the public and firefighters. This also results in lower risk to sensitive wildlife species (i.e. Northern goshawk, Western boreal toad (Anaxyrus boreas boreas), and Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah)); and, 6. Increasing the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (USFS 2001). 1.6 Management Direction and Guidance This action responds to the goals and objectives outlined in the LRMP (USFS 1986). The desired conditions described above and the purpose and need for this project are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in chapter IV of the LRMP, and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). The proposed treatment units are within management areas 2B – Rural and Roaded Natural Recreation; 4A – Fish Habitat Improvement; 4B – Habitat for Management Indicator Species; 5A – Big Game Winter Range - Non-forested; 6B – Intensive Livestock Management; 7B – Wood-Fiber Production - Genetics; and 9F – Improved Watershed (Figure 20). The relevant goals and objectives are listed below: 1. Ecosystems are restored and maintained, consistent with land uses and historic fire regimes, through wildland fire use and prescribed fire (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-40). 2. Manage forest cover types to provide variety in stand sizes shape, crown closure, edge contrast, age structure and interspersion (LRMP p. IV-99). 3. Prescribed fire is authorized forest-wide (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-41). 4. Use prescribed fire to reduce fuel buildup and meet resource objectives (LRMP p. IV-5). 5. Reduce hazardous fuels; the full range of reduction methods is authorized, consistent with forest and MA emphasis and direction (Utah Fire Amendment, pg. A-41). 6. Identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened, and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals (LRMP IV-4). 7. Improve or maintain the quality of habitat on big game winter ranges (LRMP IV-4). 8. Maintain structural diversity of vegetation on management areas dominated by forested ecosystems (LRMP IV-11). 9. Manage aspen for retention where needed for wildlife, watershed, or esthetic purposes (LRMP IV-11). 10. Manage seral aspen stands for a diversity of age classes (LRMP IV-11). 11. Manage aspen to perpetuate the species and improve quality (LRMP IV-4). 12. Provide wood fiber while maintaining or improving other resource values LRMP IV-4). 13. Improve timber age class distribution and maintain species diversity (LRMP IV-4). 14. Manage tree stands using both commercial and noncommercial methods. Enhance visual quality, diversity, and insect and disease control (LRMP IV-62 and IV-84d). 15. Maintain and manage forested inclusions to provide a high level of forage production, wildlife habitat, and diversity (LRMP IV-112). 16. The area would have a mosaic of fully stocked stands that follow natural patterns and avoid straight lines and geometric shapes (LRMP IV-113). 17. Prevent and control insect infestation and disease (LRMP IV-5)  One goal of this project is to move toward historic fire regimes in these vegetation types on Monroe Mountain. Wildland fire is authorized forest-wide by the Utah Fire Amendment (A-41) under management area goal IV-3 (Diversity), except in the following areas:  1. Administrative sites; 2. Developed recreation sites; 3. Summer home sites; 4. Designated communication sites; 5. Oil and gas facilities; 6. Mining facilities; 7. Above-ground utility corridors; and, 8. High-use travel corridors.  The management response for these locations would be wildland fire suppression if they were threatened. In areas authorized for wildland fire use, the full range of management responses (from full suppression to monitoring of wildland fire activity) may be used. The goal is to “ultimately increase the probability that future naturally caused fires can be managed (if possible, Figure 20. Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan Management Areas  not suppressed) and allowed to play the greatest feasible natural role in the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain (USFS 2001).” The District has also compared the action alternatives with the general direction and standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP to determine compliance, and found that the action alternatives are compliant with the general direction and standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP. The District determined a LRMP amendment would not be required as part of this project. This review, along with supporting rationale is found in the project record. 1.7 Proposed Action The action proposed by the District to meet the purpose and need is to conduct a combination of prescribed fire and/or mechanical thinning treatments in stable and seral aspen stands, and spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands to promote the regeneration and recruitment of aspen communities. Some stands currently dominated by spruce/fir and mixed conifer may have been dominated by aspen at some point in the past. As shown in Figure 6 and Table 2, aspen occurs in varying percentages in spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen dominated stands. Treating spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and aspen stands would reduce competition for resources, and encourage aspen to regenerate.  The proposed action is similar for all of the alternatives. What vary within the alternatives are the acreages of mechanical thinning verses the acreages of prescribed fire that would be treated depending on the issues (section 1.15), and the mileage of temporary roads proposed for each alternative. The treatment options proposed for the project area are: (1) areas would be mechanically thinned with the associated slash piled and burned, and (2) areas would receive prescribed fire treatments. Please see chapter 2 for detailed descriptions of these treatment options and each alternative.  Addressing the reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression on Monroe Mountain is critical to the long-term restoration of aspen ecosystems. The average fire return intervals for each of the vegetation cover types occurring on Monroe Mountain can be found in Table 5. This table also shows that the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer is 47,274 acres (alternative 4). However, the management guidelines for Northern goshawk require leaving 40 percent interlocking crowns in foraging areas. To be compliant with the guidelines, prescribed burning would only occur when 60 percent of the prescribed fire area is expected to burn. This would leave 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns intact. As for the areas proposed for mechanical treatments, by removing just conifer and/or removing conifer trees up to 8 inch DBH, using group, and singletree selection, desiring uneven-aged management, and proposing minimal mechanical treatments in the stable aspen stands, 40 percent of the area with interlocking crowns would also remain intact in the mechanical treatment areas. Therefore, the maximum area proposed for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on Monroe Mountain for aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer (assuming only 60 percent of the prescribed fire treatment areas are burned) is 36,300 acres (alternative 4). The approximate duration of this project is 10 years; therefore, approximately 18,150 acres would be mechanically treated and/or prescribed burned every 5 years. This number is well within the recommended range of area to treat within a 5-year period of 5,000 to 24,000 acres (Table 5).  Mechanical thinning and prescribed fire treatments are proposed within five Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore) and within five draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). No roads would be constructed within IRAs. Temporary roads would be constructed in treatment areas located outside of the IRAs (for all alternatives) including within draft UUAs (see alternatives 4 and 5). The mileage for these temporary roads varies depending on the alternative (see chapter 2 for specific road locations, mileage, and specifications; Figure 45 through Figure 51). In addition, temporary fencing would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (see chapter 2 for fencing locations, mileage, and specifications; Figure 21)  No active treatments are proposed within the sagebrush cover-type where scattered aspen trees and stands occur in portions of the sagebrush communities. These areas are expected to improve through passive restoration (i.e., by trying to allow naturally ignited fires to burn, and changing grazing and browsing management). See chapter 2 for a detailed description of the District’s proposal to address overbrowsing of aspen. 1.8 Fire Severity Definitions Low soil burn severity: Surface organic layers are not completely consumed and are still recognizable. Structural aggregate stability is not changed from its unburned condition, and roots are generally unchanged because the heat pulse below the soil surface was not great enough to consume or char any underlying organics. The ground surface, including any exposed mineral soil, may appear brown or black (lightly charred), and the canopy and understory vegetation would likely appear “green.”  Moderate soil burn severity: Up to 80 percent of the pre-fire ground cover (litter and ground fuels) may be consumed but generally not all of it. Fine roots (approximately 0.1 inch in diameter) may be scorched but are rarely completely consumed over much of the area. The color of the ash on the surface is generally blackened with possible gray patches. There may be potential for recruitment of effective ground cover from scorched needles or leaves remaining in the canopy that would soon fall to the ground. The prevailing color of the site is often “brown” due to canopy needle and other vegetation scorch. Soil structure is generally unchanged.  High soil burn severity: all or nearly all of the pre-fire ground cover and surface organic matter (litter, duff, and fine roots) is generally consumed, and charring may be visible on larger roots. The prevailing color or the site is often “black” due to extensive charring. Bare soil or ash is exposed and susceptible to erosion, and aggregate structure may be less stable. White or gray ash (up to several inches in depth) indicates that considerable ground cover or fuels were consumed. Sometimes very large tree roots (greater than 3 inches in diameter) are entirely burned extending from a charred stump hold. Soil is often gray, orange, or reddish at the ground surface where large fuels were concentrated and consumed. 1.9 Decision Framework During the final environmental impact statement process the District Ranger for the District is the Forest Service official responsible for deciding whether to select one of the action alternatives, select the no action alternative, or select a combination of the alternatives. This decision includes determining: (1) the location and treatment methods for all restoration activities; (2) design criteria, mitigation, and monitoring requirements; and (3) the browse threshold/response option components. 1.10 Other Planning Efforts Other restoration activities (actions on private, State, and other non-National Forest System lands) that influence, or are complementary to this analysis are addressed in the cumulative effects section. 1.11 Relationship to the Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) The LRMP sets forth in detail the direction for managing the land and resources of the forest. The desired conditions for the project are based on the objectives, goals, standards, and guidelines outlined in the LRMP. This analysis tiers to the Forest’s Final EIS and LRMP (USFS 1986), as encouraged by 40 CFR 1502.20. Best available science was used to develop desired conditions that are consistent with the LRMP. 1.12 Management Direction The project area includes seven management areas as described in the LRMP (USFS 1986; pages IV-66 to IV-153; Figure 20). Table 6 displays the management areas located within the project area, LRMP emphasis, and the relationship between the management area total acreage to the project. For more information see chapter IV of the LRMP where detailed descriptions of forestwide resource direction specific to management areas are located. The acreage and percent of the management areas for Monroe Mountain that are proposed for treatment are alternative specific and can be found in chapter 2.       Table 6. Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) Management Areas (MAs) within the project area LRMP MA Description LRMP Emphasis Forest-wide MA Acres Maximum MA Acres Proposed Maximum Percentage of MA Treated MA 2B Rural and Roaded Natural Recreation Emphasis is for rural and roaded-natural recreation opportunities. 27,855 4 0.0001% MA 4A Fish Habitat Improvement Emphasis is on fish habitat improvement where aquatic habitat is below productive potential. 2,474 171 0.07% MA 4B Habitat for Management Indicator Species Management emphasis is on the habitat needs of one or more management indicator species. 354,732 26,546 0.07% MA 5A Big Game Winter Range – Non- Forested Treatments are applied to increase forage production of grass, forb, and browse species or to alter plant species composition for winter range for deer, elk, and bighorn sheep (if introduced). 66,720 475 0.007% MA 6B Intensive Livestock Management Range resource management level D (intensive management) is applied. 658,704 4,849 0.007% MA 7B Wood Fiber Products – Through Genetics Manage wood-fiber production and utilization of large roundwood of a size and quality suitable for sawtimber. 6,061 2,610 43% MA 9F Improved Watershed Improving watershed condition to eliminate the watershed improvement backlog, and maintaining projects already completed. 135,842 1,646 0.01% 1.13 Public Involvement 1.13.1 Collaboration In January 2010, the Utah Forests Aspen Restoration Working Group (UFRWG) finalized the Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah (UFRWG 2010). As part of this effort, the UFRWG submitted a call for project proposals that could effectively test the newly created guidelines. The Forest submitted the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to the UFRWG for their consideration. The proposal was accepted and in April 2011, the working group created the Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG) to provide recommendations and feedback to the District as the project was developed.  Since its inception, the District has met with the MMWG almost monthly since May 2011. These meetings were open to the public. This collaboration group has had many discussions on the details of this project, and the District adopted the group’s Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain (MMWG 2014; appendix C) recommendations for this analysis. This document addresses the identified overbrowsing issue as it provides quantifiable browsing thresholds and responses options that could be implemented if browsing thresholds are surpassed following project implementation (see chapter 2 for browse thresholds and response options).  The MMWG consist of the following stakeholders: Utah Cattlemen’s Association; Utah Woolgrowers Association; Utah State University Extension; Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife; Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation; Trout Unlimited; Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR); Piute County Commission; Sevier County Commission; Utah Department of Agriculture and Food; Utah Farm Bureau; Rocky Mountain Research Station; Grand Canyon Trust; Western Aspen Alliance; and Utah Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands.  In addition, the District supports and encourages Utah Forestry Fire and State Lands, and private landowners to conduct fuels reduction treatments on private lands. Many landowners have and continue to implement fuels reduction work on their private lands. Most landowners still need to complete fuels reduction work. Independent of this Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project, the District would continue to encourage and support fuels reduction treatments on private lands. This work on private lands is included in the cumulative effects analysis under issue 2.  In developing the action alternatives for this project, the District implemented the four fundamental steps outlined in the UFRWG’s 2010 Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah.  1. Step 1: Assess the condition of aspen; 2. Step 2: Identify problematic aspen conditions and their agents/causes; 3. Step 3: select from among appropriate response options that address the potentially problematic conditions; and 4. Step 4: monitor to assess aspen stand conditions and management/restoration.  By following these four major steps in making a decision about aspen forest restoration on Monroe Mountain, this project is consistent with and following the 2010 Guidelines for Aspen Restoration on the National Forests in Utah (UFRWG 2010; appendix B).  Scoping and Draft 1.13.2 Environmental Impact Statement The project was posted to the Forest’s schedule of proposed actions website on October 1, 2012 and the notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement was published in the Federal Register on October 3, 2012 (FR Doc. 2012-24317). In October 2012, letters were mailed to approximately 250 individuals (Monroe Mountain landowners, livestock permittees, tribal representatives, Federal/State/Local government representatives, etc.). The NOI asked for public comment on the proposal from October 3 until November 19, 2012. The District received comments from 22 entities including individuals, local government, state government, federal and state agencies, and organizations. A scoping report that includes a summary of the scoping comments and associated responses can be found in the project record.  The notice of availability (NOA) of the draft environmental impact statement (DEIS) was published in the Federal Register on January 16, 2015 (FR Doc. 2015-0010) starting the 45-day comment period, which ended on March 2, 2015. The legal notice was posted in the newspaper of record (Richfield Reaper) on January 21, 2015. Letters were mailed to approximately 250 individuals (Monroe Mountain landowners, livestock permittees, tribal representatives, Federal/State/Local government representatives, etc.) announcing the availability of the NOA. The Forest received 35 comment letters from 31 entities including individuals, local government, state government, federal and state agencies, and organizations regarding the DEIS (Appendix D). 1.13.3 Public Meetings An open house was conducted on October 10, 2012 for the public to view documents and maps of the proposal, ask questions, and submit comments. The District also held public meetings to discuss the project and answer questions on January 7, 2013 (6 in attendance); January 8, 2013 and January 9, 2013 (16 in attendance); January 11, 2013 (11 in attendance); and February 21, 2013 (9 in attendance).  After the publication of the draft environmental impact statement, public meetings were held on January 29, 2015 and January 30, 2015. In addition, during January and February 2015 the Fishlake National Forest met with the Monroe City Council, Six County Association of Governments, Sevier County Council of Governments, WildEarth Guardians, Western Watersheds, Yellowstone to Uintas, Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation, Sportsman for Fish and Wildlife, Piute County Commission, Monroe Mountain Working Group, Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group, and the Sevier County Commission.  Additionally, the District has almost met monthly since the projects inception with the MMWG. These MMWG meetings are always open to the public to provide information, ask and answer questions, and discuss the proposal. 1.13.4 Cooperating Agencies The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources is a cooperating agency. Since overbrowsing of aspen is identified as one of the primary underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain, UDWR is a cooperating agency to assist this project with helping address wildlife related issues. The Utah Wildlife Board also supports the aspen browse threshold and response options outlined in this document, as stated in their letter signed by Jake Albrecht, Chairman of the Utah Wildlife Board (dated August 28, 2014; Albrecht 2014). 1.14 Tribal Consultation On October 1, 2012, the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, the Ute Indian Tribe, and the Hopi Indian Tribe were each sent the NOI to prepare a DEIS for this project. The District did not receive any comments from these tribes regarding this project.  On January 8, 2015, these same tribes were sent copies of the draft environmental impact statement. During the comment period for the DEIS, the Forest received comments from the Director of the Hopi Cultural Preservation Office. They stated that if the cultural resource survey of the area of potential effect identifies prehistoric sites that may be adversely affected by project activities, then copies of the cultural resources survey report and any proposed treatment plans be available for their review and comment. They also stated they support the project design feature that if any cultural features or deposits are encountered during project activities, these activities will be discontinued in the immediate area of the remains, and the State Historic Preservation Office would be consulted to evaluate their nature and significance. If any Native American human remains or funerary objects are discovered during construction, they shall immediately be reported as required by law. 1.15 Issues The interdisciplinary team reviewed the scoping comments from public individuals, interest groups, local governments, and other agencies, to develop a list of issues to address. The issues were separated into two groups: key and non-key issues. Key issues were defined as those directly or indirectly caused by implementing the proposed action. Non-key issues were identified as those:  1. Addressed through LRMP or implementation of LRMP standards and guidelines and best management practices; 2. Addressed through implementation of project-specific mitigation measures/design features; 3. Addressed during processes or analyses routinely conducted by an interdisciplinary team; 4. Addressed through spatial location of activities during alternative design; 5. Beyond the scope of the project; or 6. General comment.  The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) NEPA regulations explain these delineations in Sec. 1501.7, “…identify, and eliminate from detailed study the issues which are not significant or which have been covered by prior environmental review (Sec. 1506.3)…” A list of non-key issues and reasons regarding their categorization as non-significant is in the project record. Following are the key issues identified by the public and used to focus the analysis or drive alternative development.  Issue 1 – Impacts to 1.15.1 wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroadedundeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation There are five IRAs and draft UUAs located within the Monroe Mountain project boundary (Langdon, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Signal Peak, and Tibadore). There is concern that mechanical treatments may result in roadless area characteristics and wilderness attributes being impacted to a point that these areas would no longer qualify for future designation as Wilderness.  Indicator: condition of IRAs and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas post-treatment 1.15.2 Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property Prescribed fire activities may result in impacts to private property. Current fuel loads in areas adjacent to private properties generally do not allow prescribed fire activities to be managed safely with low risk of affecting private property. The reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression has contributed to the increased fuel loads over most of Monroe Mountain, including areas adjacent to private property.  Indicator: changing fire behavior (flame length, spotting, and crown fire) adjacent to private lands, via mechanical treatments, to facilitate safer prescribed fire burn conditions 1.15.3 Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced Prescribed fire and mechanical thinning activities that occur within or adjacent to Northern goshawk territories may result in nest abandonment, the displacement of goshawks, and potential mortality. Project activities may remove or degrade potential foraging habitat in the short-term.  Indicator: nesting success, recruitment, and percent survival of Northern goshawks  Issue 4 – Project 1.15.4 activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded Prescribed fire and mechanical thinning activities that occur within or near Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat may result in degraded habitat conditions, and increase chance in mortality for these species.  Indicator: breeding/spawning success, recruitment, and percent survival of Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toads. 1.15.5 Issue 5 – Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots posttreatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands Wild and domestic ungulates browsing on new aspen shoots post-treatment may result in aspen shoots not reaching 6 feet in height; generally considered the height at which the aspen shoots can survive moderate browsing and grow into mature individuals. Mechanical and prescribed fire treatments would be implemented to disturb aspen stands thus stimulating aspen regeneration. During the period immediately following treatments, and for several years after project activities are conducted, post-treatment areas may be subject to heavy browsing by wild and domestic ungulates, thus increasing the potential for the loss of entire stands of aspen.  Indicator: percent aspen browsed immediately following treatments 1.15.6 Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons) Aspen shoots are susceptible to overbrowsing by domestic and wild ungulates post-treatment. To ensure successful recruitment of aspen shoots, domestic livestock would be removed from treatment areas or stable aspen areas for two to three growing seasons. This may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock on the National Forest for several years post-treatment.  Indicators: growth of aspen shoots and recovery of other forage plants post-treatment; the percent of each pasture being treated; and the timing of when each pasture would be treated  Issue 7 – Project 1.15.7 activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics There is a concern that mechanical and prescribed fire treatments may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics.  Indicators: condition of old growth characteristics post-treatment  2 PROPOSED ACTION AND ALTERNATIVES 2.1 Introduction This chapter describes the proposed action and alternatives, and compares the alternatives considered for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. It includes the description and maps of each alternative considered. This section also presents the alternatives in comparative form, sharply defining the differences between each alternative and providing a clear basis for choice among options by the decision maker and the public. Some of the information used to compare the alternatives is based upon the design of the alternative and some of the information is based upon the environmental, social, and economic effects of implementing each alternative. 2.2 Proposed Action  2.2.1 Proposed Mechanical Treatments 2.2.1.1 Seral and Stable Aspen Stands There are two mechanical treatment options being considered in this analysis for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photo 13 through 21; appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photo 14, Photo 17, and Photo 20; appendix A; Table 7). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (Photo 15, Photo 18, and Photo 21; appendix A; Table 8). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer. 2.2.1.2 Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods There are also two mechanical treatments options being considered in this analysis for spruce/fir and mixed dominated conifer stands (Photo 22 through Photo 30; appendix A): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area (Photo 23, Photo 26, and Photo 28; appendix A; Table 7).  Table 7. Option 1—Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning  Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 3,146 Stable Aspen 4,025 Spruce/Fir 918 Mixed Conifer 97 Total 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 6,422 Stable Aspen 4,780 Spruce/Fir 2,355 Mixed Conifer 91 Total 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 9,492 Stable Aspen 6,130 Spruce/Fir 4,113 Mixed Conifer 102 Total 19,837  Seral Aspen 6,736  Stable Aspen 5,340 Alternative 5 Spruce/Fir 2,905  Mixed Conifer 92  Total 15,073  a) If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest21). b) If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest22). c) In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees are greater than a Basal Area (BA) of 9023, the remaining 21 Salvage harvest – The removal of dead trees, damaged trees, or dying trees resulting from injurious agents other than competition (Helms 1998). 22 Sanitation harvest – The removal of trees to improve stand health by stopping or reducing the actual or anticipated spread of insects and disease (Helms 1998). 23 A BA of 90 helps reduce fuel loads to facilitate prescribed burning. Disturbance from lowering the BA to 90 is expected to help stimulate new aspen growth while maintaining a spruce and conifer presence. A BA of 90 is also expected to reduce the probability of continued Spruce beetle infestation (Jenkins 2014) and is expected to allow for trees to grow bigger. live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management24 to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d) If no beetle killed or infested trees are present initially, trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (Photo 24, Photo 27, and Photo 29; appendix A; Table 8). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands. 24 Uneven-aged management – a planning sequence of treatments designed to maintain and regenerate a stand with three or more age classes (Helms 1998). This is opposed to even-aged management that describes a stand as trees composed of a single age class.   Table 8. Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 2,349 797 3,146 Stable Aspen 3,643 382 4,025 Spruce/Fir 472 446 918 Mixed Conifer 89 8 97 Total 6,553 1,633 8,186 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 3,111 3,311 6,422 Stable Aspen 3,965 815 4,780 Spruce/Fir 835 1,520 2,355 Mixed Conifer 90 1 91 Total 8,001 5,647 13,648 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 3,991 5,501 9,492 Stable Aspen 4,196 1,934 6,130 Spruce/Fir 1,186 2,927 4,113 Mixed Conifer 91 11 102 Total 9,464 10,373 19,837 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 2,547 4,189 6,736 Stable Aspen 3,830 1,510 5,340 Spruce/Fir 984 1,921 2,905 Mixed Conifer 91 1 92 Total 7,452 7,621 15,073  Proposed 2.2.2 Prescribed Fire Treatments Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. To maintain LRMP compliance, prescribed fire would occur when 60 percent of the area would be expected to burn (Table 9).  Table 9. Proposed prescribed fire treatments.  Existing Vegetation Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 7,991 4,795 Spruce/Fir 5,658 3,395 Mixed Conifer 4,183 2,510 Total 32,991 19,795 Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 14,318 8,591 Stable Aspen 7,861 4,716 Spruce/Fir 4,988 2,993 Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Total 31,357 18,814 Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,693 4,016 Spruce/Fir 3,802 2,281 Mixed Conifer 4,178 2,507 Total 27,436 16,462 Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 11,676 7,006 Stable Aspen 6,777 4,066 Spruce/Fir 3,810 2,286 Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Total 26,453 15,872 2.3 Design Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to all Action Alternatives  Mechanical 2.3.1 Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning, and Prescribed Fire Treatments • All applicable LRMP standards and guidelines would be applied and incorporated into all the action alternatives. • Treated areas would be rested from livestock grazing for two to three growing seasons post implementation, and possibly three to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts. • Invasive and noxious weeds are not known to occur in the proposed treatment areas; however, treatment areas would be monitored post-implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas. • Equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. • Equipment would be cleaned and dried before moving from one water source to another to prevent the spread of aquatic invasive species (AIS). If equipment cannot be completely dried, equipment would be decontaminated following the 2014 Region 4 Fire AIS guidelines (USFS 2014a). • Treatments would target upland, non-riparian areas first. No more than 15 percent of the upland areas within a hydrologic unit code (HUC) 6 would be treated in any one year. After the upland areas have been treated (15 percent) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function, additional upland areas (15 percent) in the same HUC 6 could occur. • After the upland areas have been treated and have recovered [comparable] watershed function and aspen restocking (1,000 aspen saplings per acre) are being achieved, then the aspen or conifer in riparian areas could be treated. • No more than 5 to 10 percent of the riparian areas within a HUC 6 would be treated in any one year. After the riparian areas have been treated (5 to 10 percent) and have recovered [comparable] watershed function, additional riparian areas (5 to 10 percent) in the same HUC 6 could occur. • Following treatments, if determined necessary by the Forest’s fish biologist, hydrologist, or soil scientist, wood chips, slash, mulch, straw, and/or silt fences could be installed to help minimize impacts from soil erosion. • A Spill Prevention Control and Containment Plan would be compiled and in place prior to project implementation. • Areas for fuel storage, refueling, servicing, and parking of equipment would occur outside riparian areas in designated locations. • Significant historical and cultural sites identified by the Forest archaeologist would be protected from prescribed fire treatments by the construction of a control line observing a 100-foot buffer from the site. These sites would also be protected from mechanical treatments by observing the same 100-foot buffer from the site. • To provide for firefighter and public safety, some roads and dispersed camping areas may be temporarily closed during prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatment implementation. Temporary closures would be determined by implementation personnel and would be based on the hazards present at the time of implementation. • Within Northern goshawk areas, all applicable Fishlake LRMP Amendment Northern Goshawk Guidelines (USFS 2000) would be followed. For example: • Forest vegetative manipulation (timber harvest, prescribed burning, fuelwood, thinnings, weedings, etc.) would not occur within active nest areas (NA) (approximately 30 acres; i.e. guideline O.) during the active nesting period. The active nesting period would normally occur between March 1 and September 30. • Vegetative treatments are designed to maintain or promote VSS (Table 3); the percent of the group acreage covered by clumps of trees with interlocking crowns should typically range from 40 to 70 percent in PFAs areas (PFAs) and foraging areas, and 50 to 70 percent in NAs. To manage outside this range, it would either be shown that the range is not within PFC for the site and the biological evaluation process determines that managing outside the range would be consistent with the landscape needs of the Northern goshawk and its prey. The best and most reliable information would be used to make determinations. The District is not proposing to manage outside this range. Groups are made up of multiple clumps of trees. Groups would be of a size and distribution in a landscape that is consistent with disturbance patterns defined in regional or local PFC assessments. Clumps typically have two to nine trees with interlocking crowns. • To help minimize impacts to migratory bird trust resources, coordination with the USFWS would occur as special circumstances arise. • Within the spruce/fir dominated areas, to help minimize impacts from mechanical treatments on cavity nesting birds, thinning activities would usually commence after July 15. • Within the aspen areas, a minimum of 200 snags per 100 acres: 8 inch DBH – 15 feet tall would be retained. Within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas, a minimum of 300 snags per 100 acres: 18 inch DBH – 30 feet tall would be retained. • Within the aspen areas, a minimum of 50 down logs per 10 acres, 6-inch diameter at 8 feet long, and 30 tons per 10 acres would be retained. Within the mixed conifer and spruce/fir areas, a minimum of 50 down logs per 10 acres, 12-inch diameter at 8 feet long, and 100 tons per 10 acres would be retained. • Livestock grazing permittees would be notified at least 1 year in advance of the treatments that would take place on their allotments. Discussions on to how to best rest the treated areas would occur directly with the permittees. The District would ensure the resting of treatment areas, herding, and electric fences are incorporated into Annual Operating Instructions. These actions would help ensure that permittees are in the communication loop and would give them enough time to plan for the resources they need to continue their operations. • Impacts to permittees would be minimized by the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas and/or stable aspen stands can be rested while nontreatment areas can continue to be grazed. • If any prehistoric cultural features or deposits are encountered during project implementation, activities would be discontinued in the immediate area of the remains, and the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) would be consulted to evaluate their nature and significance. In addition, if any Native American human remains or funerary objects were discovered during implementation they would be immediately reported as required by law. • If project activities inadvertently discover habitation sites, plant gathering areas, human remains, and objects of cultural patrimony, the Historic Preservation Department – Traditional Culture Program would be notified respectively in accordance with the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act.  Mechanical 2.3.2 Thinning Treatments and Associated Slash Pile Burning • Ground based mechanical treatments would only occur on slopes less than 40 percent. • Within riparian areas, equipment operations would occur when soils are dry, frozen or snow levels are sufficient to prevent wheels or tracks from coming in contact with soil. • Cutting methods would include, but are not limited to, feller bunchers, skid-steers attached with saws, and/or hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. • Merchantable wood and biomass removal methods to the nearest road would include, but are not limited to, skid-steers, skidders, horses, helicopters, and/or cables. The most likely areas for helicopter use would be near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake. • Within riparian areas, low ground pressure equipment (i.e. skid-steers) would be used where possible to help minimize soil impacts. • Trees located on rocky ridges, or in other areas that are not as susceptible to fire would not be cut. • A combination of skid trails, temporary roads, and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments that occur outside IRAs. Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. • Inside the IRAs, skid trails and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments. No temporary roads would be constructed inside the IRAs. For areas that cannot be accessed via existing roads, cross-country travel would be allowed to facilitate access to specific stands. • No temporary roads would be constructed in Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs. • No skid trails or landings would be constructed inside riparian areas. • Efforts would be made to cut trees as close to the ground as possible. • Efforts would be made to have merchantable trees removed from Monroe Mountain. • Non-merchantable trees and slash would be consolidated and either piled and burned, or hauled off-site. Non-merchantable trees could also be made available for firewood cutting. • Inside IRAs, if existing roads and skid trails do not allow for the removal of biomass, trees and slash may be consolidated, piled, and burned on-site. • No mechanical treatments using feller bunchers or skid-steers would occur in the stable aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. These areas may still be mechanically treated with hand crews equipped with chainsaws, bow saws, or loppers. • Jack-strawing on a small scale, in site-specific areas to help impede ungulate access may occur.  2.3.3 Prescribed Fire Treatments • Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. • No direct fire ignitions would occur in the stable aspen stands that have little to no conifer presence (less than 40 conifer stems per acre) in the aspen understory. • No direct fire ignitions would occur in riparian areas on side slopes greater than 40 percent. On side slopes less than 40 percent in riparian areas, prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. Riparian areas would be ignited on the outside edge so that the prescribed fire could back towards the interior of the riparian area. • Pile burning would be limited in riparian areas. No pile burning would occur within a 100 feet of water. Pile burning that does occur within riparian areas would occur when fuel moisture levels are sufficient to limit creep. • Within the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands that have little to no aspen presence (less than 15 aspen recruits per acre), prescribed burning would occur when low to moderate fire severities would be expected. • For prescribed fire implementation, if water needs to be drafted, all water intakes would be equipped with a screen to prevent intake of fish and amphibian species. Drafting sites would be approved by the Forest’s fish biologist prior to use. • Prior to ignition, control lines may need to be constructed around the perimeter of the prescribed fire treatment areas. • Control lines would be constructed with chainsaws, hand tools, and/or skid-steer equipment attached with a fecon head, Marshall saw and/or grapple hooks to primarily remove smaller diameter trees averaging less than 8 inch DBH, limb larger diameter trees, remove 1000 hour fuels, and dig handline. Trees larger than 8 inch DBH that may pose a threat to the effectiveness of the control lines would also be removed. • Efforts would be made to cut trees as close to the ground as possible. • Control lines would be feathered25 on the edges. Depending on slope, topography, and fuel loading, control lines may vary in width. • Control lines would be reclaimed upon completion of the prescribed fire treatments. • Prescribed fires would comply with the Utah State air quality standards. Prior to prescribed fire implementation, the District would obtain approval from Utah Smoke Management. • Interested parties would be notified prior to implementing any prescribed burning. 25 Feathering is described as the following: as control lines are constructed, the amount of fuel removed would decrease as distance from the control lines edge increases. By feathering the control lines, impacts related to visuals can be reduced. • No broadcast prescribed burning would occur in Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs. Burning in PFAs or NAs would be limited to pile burning of slash material. • No direct fire ignitions would occur during the nesting season (usually between May 15 and August 1) in areas where cavity nesting birds such as three-toed woodpeckers (Picoides tridactylus) are found. • No fire ignitions that would likely result in moderate to high fire severities in Douglas fir dominated areas would occur to preserve Flammulated owl (Otus flammeolus) habitat and populations on Monroe Mountain. Low severity fire in the Douglas fir dominated stands during the non-nesting season (usually before May 15 and after August 1) would be allowed.  Aquatics Monitoring 2.3.4 and Design Features 2.3.4.1 Boreal Toad Specific Design Features Definition: Boreal toad mapped habitat is defined as the area within 328 feet from either side of streams, or from the high water lines of ponds, lakes, and wetlands, that are known to be occupied by boreal toad, have been occupied by boreal toad, or are adjacent to occupied habitat and suitable for use by boreal toad and the area within 984 feet of documented breeding sites. • Utilize boreal toad Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) of 328 feet from each side of streams, or from the high water lines of ponds, lakes, and wetlands, as buffers for vegetation treatments. Utilize RHCAs of 984 feet from known boreal toad breeding ponds. • In order to protect boreal toads and hibernacula26 from being crushed, no ground-based mechanized harvesting equipment would be permitted within the RHCAs. • Within the RHCAs, vegetation treatments would be limited to hand treatments, horse, or helicopter thinning up to 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands or up to 328 feet from the known boreal toad breading ponds. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within 100 feet of perennial streams or within 328 feet of breeding ponds, lakes, or other sites unless such treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. • *Any exceptions to this design feature would be for the purpose of improving boreal toad habitat or reducing fire risk to boreal toad habitat, and would be approved by the Forest fisheries biologist. Design feature exceptions would be documented with a map of the area to be treated, any treatment requirements (i.e. timing, method to be used, etc.), and any needed implementation and/or posttreatment monitoring prior to treatment. A summary of monitoring results would be included on the documentation sheet post-treatment. See Appendix M in the Aquatics Specialist Report (Whelan 2015). • Within the RHCAs it is allowable to leave some slash scattered and some slash piles unburned within riparian habitat to create micro habitat for boreal toads. No pile or slash burning would occur within 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands or 26 An opening where Boreal toads can go underground. breeding sites edge. Within the remainder of the RHCAs, pile or slash burning would only occur on slopes and upland soils and habitats (i.e. outside of deep riparian soils and/or true riparian vegetation) during the boreal toad dormant season (October 1 through April 15) unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • Within the RHCAs, snags (200 per 100 acres in aspen, 300 per 100 acres in mixed conifer spruce/fir, and large downed logs (50 per 10 acres; a minimum of 15 tons per acre) would be retained as cover for toads. • Within the RHCAs, vegetation thinning treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would target less than 60 percent of the stands if treated for complete conifer removal (aspen cover type) or thinning to BA 90 (spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types); or would target less than 80 percent of aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer stands if treated by thinning conifer from below up to 8 inch DBH. • If any unmapped perennial streams, seeps, or other water sources in boreal toad supporting habitat are encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 100-foot buffer. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless these treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist*. • If any boreal toad hibernacula are encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 328-foot buffer. No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. • Temporary roads within the RHCAs would have toad passage friendly culverts installed where culverts are needed (buried culverts or bottomless arched structures) for the duration of the project. • Dipping or drafting water for fire activities from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show a change in water levels from the use would be avoided, except for emergencies. • Monitoring of boreal toad populations (in addition to current levels by the UDWR would be implemented to document project effects and to help plan future vegetation management projects in boreal toad habitat. This would include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations. See Appendix J in the Aquatic Specialist Report for Sensitive and MIS Aquatic Species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project (appendix F; Whelan 2015). • Within the RHCAs, prescribed burning would occur when generally low to moderate fire intensity and severities would be expected. Prescribed fire personnel would attempt to implement prescribed burning during the boreal toad dormant season (1 October through April 15). • No direct fire ignitions would occur within 100 feet from streams, ponds, lakes, and wetlands, and 328 feet from boreal toad hibernacula or breeding ponds, lakes, and other breeding sites unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. Fire ignitions could occur outside these buffers and allowed to back into these areas. • Temporary roads within RHCAs would not be constructed or used for hauling logs until after October 1 of the calendar year, unless surveys and field inspection determine that toads are not likely to be impacted. • For the 7th field HUCS (as delineated for the aquatics CEA): Manning Cr. – Manning Res., Manning Cr. – Barney Lake, Thompson Cr. - Anabella Res, and Water Cr. - Big Lake – vegetation treatments would be limited to 20 percent of the HUC area until watershed function is recovered [comparable] or would be limited to treatments that keep a current Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling of the HUC at or under the recommended Threshold of Concern (TOC) of 10. • Prior to beginning implementation within a HUC6 watershed, the Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling would be repeated for that HUC to incorporate the recovery period (i.e. years from this analysis to the implementation start date) for past projects, allow inclusion of new projects that were previously authorized but not yet carried out or completed during this planning process, and the proposed work. This would help incorporate effects from the currently authorized but not yet implemented or completed work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain/North Clover projects. If the new ERA modeling shows the proposed work would push the HUC over the suggested TOC, multiple entries would occur to reduce cumulative effects to the subwatershed. • The District would coordinate project treatments in watersheds containing Bonneville cutthroat trout or boreal toads with the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources southern region fisheries/toads personnel. 2.3.4.2 General Aquatics Monitoring As a part of this project, the District proposes to monitor boreal toads before, during, and after project implementation. Monitoring would be done to ensure project design features are implemented as designed, work as intended and are effective, and that site specific findings of toad use areas, timing, etc. are incorporated into implementation actions. This monitoring would help ensure that boreal toad impacts are minimized. Monitoring would also include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations. Appendix J in the Aquatic Specialist Report for Sensitive and MIS Aquatic Species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project (appendix F and Whelan 2015) provides an example of a monitoring plan. The monitoring plan includes project objectives of determining changes in toad use areas, chytrid fungus infection rates/changes, finding key concentration areas such as breeding sites and hibernacula that would be buffered/protected, determining boreal toad use of areas planned for treatment, comparing toad use of treated vs. untreated habitat, and (to the extent possible) determining population size and survival data. Aquatic Invasive Species (AIS) control measures and annual reporting requirements are included as part of the monitoring plan.  In addition, the District proposes to monitor fish populations, streamflow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates one time before treatments are implemented if they have not been monitored in the last 5 years. Fish populations, streamflow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates would also be monitored immediately following project implementation and one final time 3 to 5 years following project implementation. Lake water quality monitoring (basic water chemistry, nutrient levels, and secchi disk depths) would also be monitored from fish supporting lakes in the project area before project implementation in that watershed, during project implementation, and 3 to 5 years following project implementation. Monitoring would be conducted monthly during the summer season from approximately May/June through Sept/October. The District also proposes to repeat hydrological channel monitoring stations (cross-sections, longitudinal profiles, and photo points) that were established in or about 2001 on Manning Creek, Barney Creek, Dry Canyon, and Koosharem Creek. These stations would be resampled one time before treatments are implemented, immediately following project implementation, and a final time 3 to 5 years following project implementation.  Temporary and Existing 2.3.5 Roads and Skid Trails Temporary roads would feature a finished road width of approximately 15 feet and may include turnouts at regular intervals. Road cut slopes would be constructed at a 1:1 vertical-to-horizontal ration and fill slopes at a 1:1.5 ratio. Road surfaces would be outsloped at a 3 to 5 percent slope. The primary road drainage feature would be drain drips, which shall be constructed at regular intervals. Culverts would be installed at any proposed stream crossings.  Upon project completion, temporary roads would be reclaimed. Reclaiming efforts would adhere to standard engineering best management practices and would be accomplished by ripping the roadbed and/or scarifying (scratching) the road surface with mechanical equipment. Litter and debris that is available in the area (primarily slash and large rocks) would be scattered over the ripped or scarified road surface and placed at or near the temporary road origins in order to deter traffic. 2.3.5.1 Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Existing Roads and Skid Trails within Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) for All Action Alternatives • Skid trails and existing roads would be used to facilitate the mechanical treatments. No temporary roads would be constructed inside the IRAs. For areas that cannot be accessed via existing roads, cross-country travel would be allowed to facilitate access to specific stands. • If existing roads and skid trails do not allow for the removal of biomass, trees and slash may be consolidated, piled, and burned on-site. 2.3.5.2 Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails outside Inventoried Roadless Areas for All Action Alternatives • A combination of skid trails, temporary roads, and existing roads would be used to facilitate mechanical treatments. Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of mechanical treatments. Figure 21. Proposed fencing near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake  Figure 22. General treatment sequencing  2.3.5.3 Criteria and Mitigation Measures Applicable to Temporary and Existing Roads and Skid Trails Whether they are inside or outside of Inventoried Roadless Areas • No temporary roads would be constructed in Northern goshawk NAs or PFAs. • No skid trails or landings would be constructed inside riparian areas. • To provide for firefighter and public safety, some roads and dispersed camping areas may be temporarily closed during prescribed fire and mechanical treatment implementation. Temporary closures would be determined by implementation personnel and would be based on the hazards present at the time of implementation. 2.4 Temporary Fencing around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake Regardless of which alternative is selected, treatment areas adjacent to Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake would be fenced to exclude both wildlife and livestock browsing. With fencing, the amount of time needed to acquire a minimum of 1,000 aspen saplings per acre is expected to be quicker. Other vegetation and cover types are also expected to benefit from fencing.  The District is proposing to construct approximately 7.2 miles (633 acres) of temporary fence in the Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake areas (Figure 21). This fence would be approximately 8 feet tall and constructed with net wire, t-post, and wooden post. Maintenance of the temporary fence would occur for 4 to 6 years until the aspen shoots are greater than 6 feet tall, after which the fence would be removed. 2.5 Treatment Sequencing Treatment sequencing is primarily based on the current distribution of wild browsers on Monroe Mountain. Mechanical and prescribed fire treatments would probably begin in the southerly portion of the project area (area 1; Figure 22) where visually, current browse pressures on aspen appear to be less than the northerly and central portions of the project area. Following treatments in area 1, treatments in the northerly portion of the project (area 2; Figure 22) would likely be conducted. Browse pressures in the north appear to be higher than what is occurring in the south, but less than the central portion of the project area. Following treatments in areas 1 and 2, treatments in the central portion of the project area (area 3; Figure 22) would likely be initiated next. By generally sequencing the project in this order, browse pressure may be more directed away from newly treated areas; this is expected to increase the probability of regenerating aspen to reach 6 feet tall after treatment. This sequencing regime is general and may change due to on the ground conditions. This sequence may be conducted out of order, or portions of each sequence may be worked on out of sequence depending upon the conditions during project implementation.  Mechanical treatments are proposed in areas adjacent to private lands, and within/adjacent to Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout habitat. These aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas would be treated first within each sequence area (areas 1, 2, and 3). Implementing these mechanical treatments first would help reduce the risk of impacts from prescribed fire to private property, Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout. 2.6 Treatment Monitoring, Aspen Overbrowsing Thresholds, and Response Options for All Action Alternatives Approximately 120 to 140 long-term aspen transects would be used to monitor status and trend of aspen following implementation of the selected alternative. Sixty, to seventy transects would be in the seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas, and 60 to 70 in the stable aspen areas. Monitoring would address aspen regeneration/recruitment and understory conditions. Monitoring would be in conjunction and coordinated with aspen monitoring/research currently being done on Monroe Mountain by Dr. Sam St. Clair from Brigham Young University.  The MMWG submitted to the Fishlake National Forest a document titled Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain (MMWG 2014). The MMWG recommended this document for inclusion and analysis in this EIS. The Forest has reviewed this document and is proposing to adopt the browse thresholds and response options recommended by the MMWG. The document in its entirety is located in appendix C and is hereby incorporated by reference. The UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board have reviewed and support this document. The following is a summary of the document with a description of the goals, thresholds, monitoring techniques, and response options.  The goals of the Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain document are three-fold: (1) establish thresholds of maximum percent aspen browse that would be acceptable following mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments in the seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas; (2) establish thresholds for the stable aspen areas where passive treatments are proposed; and (3) establish timely response options that would take place if the thresholds are not met. The thresholds and response options are expected to result in adequate recruitment to perpetuate both seral and stable aspen stands in order to move toward the desired conditions described above.  Areas Proposed 2.6.1 for Mechanical and/or Prescribed Fire Treatments  Following mechanical and prescribed fire treatments, healthy aspen roots systems typically are able to sustain vigorous shoot growth for a limited time (2 to 3 years), providing a brief opportunity to modify management if browsing exceeds threshold levels. Therefore, the following responses have been identified as timely management responses.  To aid attainment of at least 1,000 to 2,000 aspen saplings Table 2) the District is proposing the annual aspen browse thresholds listed in Table 10 and Figure 23 following prescribed fire and mechanical treatments. These thresholds are proposed from an estimation of the maximum annual browse of the aspen sprouts that would assure the conservative outcome of at least 1,000 aspen saplings per acre and 400 to 600 aspen recruits per acre following treatments. Please refer to appendix C for further information. 27 per acre and 400 to 600 aspen recruits28 per acre (Mueggler 1989; Campbell and Bartos 2001) in areas where mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments are proposed, ( 27 A sapling is defined as an aspen shoot that has successfully reached sub-canopy height; 6 to 12 feet. 28 A recruit is defined as an aspen shoot that has successfully reached full canopy height; greater than 12 feet. 29 A sprout is defined as an aspen shoot that is less than 6 feet in height.  Implementation of these browse thresholds would require selecting the appropriate number of years (i.e., 4 to 6) the District anticipates for aspen sprouts29 to reach greater than or equal to 6 feet in height. The District anticipates the number of years for aspen sprouts to reach greater than or equal to 6 feet in height would vary throughout the project area depending on site productivity and weather conditions. To be conservative, the District proposes to start with thresholds corresponding with 6 years. If aspen responses within the first few years following treatments suggest 6 feet height would be attained sooner, then thresholds corresponding with 4 and 5 years could be used. The thresholds are also dependent upon the number of initial aspen sprouts per acre that grow immediately following the prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatments.  Monitoring at 60 to 70 sites in the mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatment areas would consist of establishing two perpendicular belt transects (e.g., 6 feet by 100 feet) per transect, and would include pellet counts for insight into use by elk, deer, cows, and/or sheep. A minimum of one transect per 300 acres treated mechanically or with prescribed fire would be established, with a greater number of transects established as needed to assess percent browse. Transects would also be established in locations that reflect the variability of the treatments area. Care would be taken to adequately represent areas of known higher use and/or vulnerability (e.g., less than 30 percent slope, less than 30 pre-treatment aspen trees per acre among the conifer).  Table 10. Proposed annual browse thresholds Years after which 1,000 aspen saplings (≥6 feet tall) per acre would be present 5,000 initial sprouts per acre 10,000 initial sprouts per acre 20,000 initial sprouts per acre 30,000 initial sprouts per acre 40,000 initial sprouts per acre percent browse 4 32 43 52 57 60 5 27 36 45 49 52 6 23 31 39 43 45  Figure 23. Projected maximum browse pressure in relation to initial aspen shoot density and time (years) needed for shoots to reach 6 feet height The browse thresholds for a specific treatment are exceeded when: (1) across all transects within the treatment area, the average transect browse percentages exceeds the browse percentages displayed in Table 10 and Figure 23; or (2) at least 40 percent of the individual transects associated with the treatment area exceed the browse percentages displayed in Table 10 and Figure 23. The allowable browse percentages could be adjusted as necessary based on observed success in aspen stand recruitment.  The scale and timing of the mechanical and prescribed fire treatments are likely to affect the level of impacts that both wild and domestic grazers have on aspen response to treatments. For this reason, as described in section 0, the District is proposing to initiate treatments in the southerly portion, followed by the northerly portion, and finishing in the central portion of Monroe Mountain. The District is also proposing to conduct mechanical treatments adjacent to private property, within or adjacent to Northern goshawk areas, and possibly adjacent to Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake areas first so that prescribed fire can occur at the largest practical scale while minimizing impacts to other resources. The District anticipates that if prescribed fire treatments are able to occur at a large scale (i.e., 5,000 acres), the level of overall impacts that both wild and domestic grazers may have on new aspen sprouts would be less.  Prior to the mechanical and prescribed fire treatments being implemented, if the District anticipates aspen browse thresholds are likely to be exceeded (e.g., the central portion of Monroe Mountain), the District would recommend to the UDWR, their Resource Advisory Council (RAC), and Utah Wildlife Board a pre-approved antlerless hunt that could be implemented, if deemed necessary, immediately following mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments in order to reduce browse pressure adequately to facilitate greater aspen recruitment. This recommendation would be subject to the Wildlife Board and RAC approval process. If approved, the UDWR, in coordination with the District, would initiate implementation of the antlerless hunt following treatments. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board.  As described above, areas treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire would be rested from livestock use for two to three growing seasons. During this timeframe, if aspen browse thresholds are exceeded, the District would implement one or more of the following responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, and to ensure aspen browse thresholds are not continually being exceeded:  • If not already being implemented, the District may recommend to the UDWR, RAC and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to hire or contract an adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e., Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in treatment areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to fence treatment areas for 4 to 6 years until the aspen new shoots reach 6 feet height. • The District may restrict livestock use longer than two to three growing seasons until aspen recovery objectives are met.  After livestock are allowed to return to treatment areas, if browse thresholds are exceeded in a treatment area(s) that is grazed by both wild ungulates and livestock, the District would implement one or more of the following responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, and to ensure aspen browse thresholds are not continually being exceeded:  • The District may recommend to the UDWR, RAC, and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board (Albrecht 2014). • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to hire/contract an adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in treatment areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing browse thresholds. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to fence treatment areas for 4 to 6 years until the aspen new shoots reach 6 feet height. • The District may seek opportunities to improve time, timing, and intensity of livestock grazing. This may include resting treatment areas again from livestock use, temporary reductions in livestock numbers, reducing the length of time that livestock are in certain pastures, and/or adjusting the timeframe of when livestock are in certain pastures. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to utilize their Grass Bank Program on state Wildlife Management Areas to help offset temporary loss of livestock opportunities.  Although management changes that reduce wild or domestic ungulate numbers may be necessary to restore healthy aspen communities on Monroe Mountain, such changes are viewed by the District as temporary and should not be interpreted as permanent or long-term reductions in stocking levels or population objectives. The District would continue to be actively engaged in the UDWR’s elk management plan revision process in order to promote understanding and consideration of aspen resource conditions.  If responses are needed, the number and type of responses are anticipated to vary depending on location and timing of treatments. Considering the location, size, and timing of treatments, responses and their probability of success are expected to vary. Decision authorities for these responses also vary. For these reasons, continued and close communication between the District, UDWR, RAC, Utah Wildlife Board, and all other interested stakeholders is critical. These responses are intended to avoid surpassing or continuous surpassing of the browse thresholds and to achieve 1,000 saplings per acre.  2.6.2 Stable Aspen Stand Areas As described in section 1.4, 58 transects have already been established in various stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. Data have been collected on overstory condition, aspen regeneration and recruitment (including browse use), fecal pellets and cow pies. These data provide a baseline dataset from which to detect change in subsequent years. The District proposes to continue monitoring aspen shoot density, height, and percent browse on an annual basis at these sites. Overstory and understory data would continue to be collected at longer intervals (3 to 5 years). Additional transects could be added as needed.  In section 1.4, the aspen stands associated with each of the 58 transects are classified as stable aspen stand type 1 (SA1), type 2 (SA2), or type 3 (SA3). Stable Aspen 1, SA2, and SA3 stands differ in the relationship of recruitment density to overstory (Figure 10 through Figure 18). For example, within SA2 and SA3, the stands are defined as currently being full self-replacing (F), transitional self-replacing (T), marginal self-replacing (M), or non-self-replacing (N). To have adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen stands, the desire is for these stable aspen stands to move towards SA1, SA2-F, or SA3-F.  The stable aspen classes and recruitment levels are thus based directly upon the densities of stems that reach heights relatively safe from browsing of top leaders, and do not initially take into account the browse intensity values that clearly influence those aspen stem densities. Patterns in annual browse data would be analyzed over time in the stable aspen areas with the objective of determining how they might be incorporated to improve assessments of stable aspen condition and determine the trajectory of the stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain.  The District anticipates that mechanical and prescribed fire treatments in seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas would have an indirect beneficial effect related to aspen browse in the stable aspen areas within three years following treatments. As mechanical and prescribed fire treatments occur in adjacent areas, the stable aspen stands would continue to be monitored. For the stable aspen stands not already in SA1, SA2-F, or in SA3-F, a minimum benchmark of success in restoring stable aspen on Monroe Mountain would be an average improvement for all eligible stands (SA2 and SA3 levels T, M, and N) that is equal to one full level increase as a benefit of doing mechanical and prescribed fire treatments in adjacent areas. Thus, for every stand that fails to move up a level, another would have to move up two levels. Stand degradation (drop in levels) would also be factored in.  The District proposes the stable aspen responses be proportional (percentage) to the area treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire. Accurately predicting how browse relief would be distributed spatially following treatments would be difficult. Therefore, the District proposes that stable aspen improvement be interpreted at the broadest spatial scale (all 58 stands). For example, one year might allow that 10 percent of the project area be treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire. Of the 58 stable aspen stands, 47 stands are classified as being eligible for improvement (section 1.4); therefore, a threshold for reclassification to at least one level higher would be needed in 4 to 5 stands (10 percent) of the 47 eligible stands, with no stands being downgraded in response to the mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments or any other factors. The District anticipates the stable aspen stand level changes may be detectable within 3 years of treatment.  If monitoring does not detect sufficient improvement of stable aspen stands after an appropriate lag time (within approximately 3 years following treatments in adjacent areas; allowing some flexibility for unknowns such as extreme weather events), the District would implement one or more of the following responses in order to achieve balanced livestock and wildlife use, and to ensure stable aspen stand conditions improve:  • The District may recommend to the UDWR, RAC, and the Utah Wildlife Board a reduction of wild ungulate browsing pressure using antlerless hunts as needed at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing the stable aspen stand thresholds. This recommendation is supported by the UDWR and the Utah Wildlife Board. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to hire or contract an adequate number of seasonal employees and/or coordinate the use of volunteers (i.e. Dedicated Hunter Program) to spend time in stable aspen stand areas hazing wildlife at levels expected to result in sufficient reduction in browse to avoid surpassing stable aspen stand thresholds. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to fence stable aspen areas until 1,000 new aspen shoots reach 6 feet height. • The District may seek opportunities to improve time, timing, and intensity of livestock grazing. This may include resting stable aspen areas from livestock use, temporary reductions in livestock numbers, reducing the length of time that livestock are in certain pastures, and/or adjusting the timeframe of when livestock are in certain pastures. • The District may coordinate with the UDWR to utilize their Grass Bank Program on state Wildlife Management Areas to help offset temporary loss of livestock opportunities.  These responses are viewed by the District as temporary and should not be interpreted as permanent or long-term reductions in stocking levels or population objectives. As additional areas are treated mechanically and/or with prescribed fire, a proportionate improvement would be expected in the stable aspen stands. A lag period of approximately 3 years would continue to be employed for each treatment. Hypothetically, this could result in responses to reduce browse pressure after mechanical and/or prescribed fire treatments in seral aspen stands even when aspen recovery within the treatment area(s) are satisfactory but where there is no corresponding improvement in stable aspen stands. The opposite is also possible, that is the District could have improvement in stable aspen stands but unsatisfactory results in the treated areas. Either way, under these conditions one or more of the responses described above to reduce browse pressure would be implemented. If thresholds are exceeded, response efforts would be based on achieving aspen ecosystem restoration and achieving the desired conditions described above.  To complement the above monitoring plan and associated responses that could occur if thresholds are exceeded, and to gain a better understanding of wildlife use on aspen in the absence of livestock, the District is considering two options:  1. Rest from livestock the Dairies pasture in the Koosharem Allotment for the duration of this project. Stable and seral aspen stands occur in the Dairies pasture and it is an area regularly used by both livestock and wild ungulates. Part of the 2012 Box Creek Fire also occurred in the Dairies pasture. After the Box Creek Fire, approximately 400 acres of aspen were fenced inside the Dairies pasture. This 8-foot high fence was built to exclude all animals from entering the 400 acres. By resting the Dairies from livestock, considering the 400 acres that is fenced to exclude all animals, much can be learned about wildlife use on aspen in the absence of livestock. This would also provide an opportunity to monitor stable aspen in the absence of livestock. 2. Establish and monitor for the duration of the project six livestock exclosures located at various locations across Monroe Mountain. Locations and specific details for these six exclosures are included in Figure 24 and Table 11. These six exclosures, given their locations in diverse stable aspen communities with varying wild ungulate usage, would be expected to give representative data. Three of the exclosures would be located in areas that have no livestock use or are in sheep allotments and would not need new fencing. The other three exclosures would be located in cattle allotments and would take advantage of existing fences but would need to have some additional fence installed to keep livestock from utilizing the area. The total amount of new livestock fence needed is approximately 2.5 miles.         Elk Use Table 11. Summary of potential livestock exclosures   Exclosure Name Allotment Pasture Cattle or Sheep Acres Season Intensity Fence Needed Scrub Flat Scrub Flat NA Sheep 100 Winter Medium No Nielson Canyon Hunts Lake NA Sheep 96 Summer Medium No Jim’s Corral Koosharem Squaw Springs Cattle 38 Summer High Yes 2.7 Alternative Development Process As a result of extensive collaboration over a 2-year timeframe and additional analysis, the proposed action was modified as allowed by 36 CFR 220.7(b)(2)(iii), which states that “the description of the proposal and alternative(s) may include a brief description of modifications and incremental design criteria developed through the analysis process to develop the range of alternatives considered.”  Minor modifications included adopting the MMWG’s 2014 Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain for browse thresholds, gathering more stand exam data, and finalizing road acreages and miles.  Those concerns that could not be addressed through minor modification to the proposal were considered key issues and drove the development of an additional alternative to consider Northern goshawk information (see section 1.15 for additional information). The minor modifications incorporated into the final proposed action were carried forward into the other alternatives. Each alternative provides a response as to how the Forest would address the key issues. The key issues driving each alternative are:  1. Issue 1 - Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within IRAs and draft UUAs may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation. 2. Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property. 3. Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced. 4. Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded.   Figure 24. Potential livestock exclosures  In addition to the above issues, each alternative differs in the alignment and distance of temporary roads outside of the IRAs. The responses to key issues 1 through 4 are located within the description for each action alternative. The response to key issues 5 through 7 are the same for all alternatives. 2.8 Response to Issues 5 through 7  Issue 5 – Browsing 2.8.1 by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. If post-treatment monitoring indicates that response options are needed, the number and type of responses are anticipated to vary depending on location and timing of treatments. Considering the location, size, and timing of treatments, responses and their probability of success are expected to vary. Decision authorities for these responses also vary. For these reasons, continued and close communication between the District, UDWR, RAC, Utah Wildlife Board, and all other interested stakeholders is critical. These responses are intended to avoid surpassing or continuous surpassing of the browse thresholds and to achieve 1,000 saplings per acre (see section 0 for an in depth discussion on the treatment monitoring, aspen overbrowsing thresholds, and response options). These response options would be utilized for all of the action alternatives. 2.8.2 Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons) Post-treatment monitoring would occur to make sure that aspen are recovering and new shoots are not being overbrowsed. Domestic livestock (cattle and sheep) would be removed from the post-treatment areas or stable aspen areas for two to three growing seasons to reduce livestock browse pressure on new aspen sprouts (see section 0). As discussed in section 0 and shown on Figure 22, Area 1 would be treated first, followed by Area 2, and finishing in Area 3. Mechanical treatments would also occur prior to prescribe burning occurring. This treatment sequence is expected to help minimize impacts to permittee operations. Impacts to permittee operations are discussed in the range section in chapter 3. Appendix C in the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resources Specialist Report (Partridge 2015; appendix L) discloses the acres of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments occurring in each allotment/pasture and the percentages of each pasture receiving active treatments. Although not anticipated, some pastures may need to be completely rested thus having a bigger impact on permittee operations. The range analysis also considers the potential for resting stable aspen stands. In summary, the range analysis and associated impacts for each action alternative are disclosed in the range section in chapter 3.  Issue 7 – Project activities m 2.8.3 ay result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics. Prescribed fire would be implemented utilizing aerial and/or hand ignition techniques targeting spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen with mosaic burn patterns and mixed burn severities as an objective. To maintain LRMP compliance, prescribed fire would occur when 60 percent of the area would be expected to burn, thus maintaining any old growth characteristics that may occur in the 40 percent not being treated with prescribed fire. This is the same for all the action alternatives.  In the stable and seral aspen areas proposed for mechanical treatment, conifer would be removed while maintaining the aspen and/or conifer would be removed from below up to 8 inch DBH. Trees located on rocky ridges (these trees are generally large and older), or in other areas that are not as susceptible to fire would also not be cut. In the spruce/fir and mixed conifer areas, live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management thus ensuring all size classes are maintained and/or conifer trees would be removed from below up to 8 inch DBH. No clearcutting is proposed. This mechanical approach is the same for all the action alternatives. This mechanical proposal is expected to minimize impacts and help maintain any old growth characteristics that may occur in the areas proposed for mechanical treatments. This old growth analysis and associated impacts for each action alternative are disclosed in the silviculture section in chapter 3. 2.9 Alternatives Considered in Detail The Forest Service developed five alternatives, including the no action alternative, in response to issues raised internally and by the public (section 1.15). 2.9.1 Alternative 1 (No Action) The no action alternative is required by 40 CFR 1502.14(c). There would be no changes in current management under the LRMP and amendments. No mechanical thinning or prescribed fire treatments would be implemented to accomplish project goals. Aspen decline would continue because conifer encroachment from reduced occurrence of wildland fire due to increased wildland fire suppression, and impacts from extensive wild and domestic ungulate browsing would continue. In addition, the chances of uncharacteristic wildland fire would increase with the continued build-up of fuel loads. This increases the threat to human life and private property, increases the risk of watershed degradation with impacts on capacity to deliver clean water, increases the threats to boreal toad, Bonneville cutthroat trout, Northern goshawk, and other wildlife and habitat, and increases the potential for further loss of aspen sprouts and entire aspen stands following wildland fires. Alternative 1 is the point of reference for assessing action alternatives 2 through 5. 2.9.2 Alternative 2 Seral and Stable Aspen Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are two mechanical treatment options being analyzed for alternative 2 for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photo 13 through Photo 21; appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photo 14, Photo 17, and Photo 20; appendix A; Table 12). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (Photo 15, Photo 18, and Photo 21; appendix A; Table 13). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer.  Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are also two mechanical treatments options being analyzed for alternative 2 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Photo 22 through Photo 30; appendix A): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area (Photo 23, Photo 26, and photo 28; appendix A; Table 12). a. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest). b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest). c. In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d. If no beetle killed or infected trees are present initially, live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection.  2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (Photo 24, Photo 27, and Photo 29; appendix A; Table 13). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer.  Roads: This alternative proposes to create 8.8 miles of temporary roads for access to mechanical treatment areas (Figure 45 through Figure 51).  The purpose of this alternative is to address issues 1 through 4 (section 1.15).  Issue 1 – Impact to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within IRAs and draft UUAs may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation  Alternative 2 proposes to treat approximately 27,981 acres (Figure 25) of aspen and spruce/fir/mixed conifer (8,186 acres of mechanical with associated slash burning and 19,795 acres of prescribed burns with mixed burn severities factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burns, leaving 40 percent of the crown intact; Table 15 and Table 16). Of the 27,981 acres, this alternative proposes to treat approximately 16,888 acres within all IRAs (20 percent of all IRAs are proposed to be treated; Table 17), and 15,672 acres within draft UUAs (17 percent of all draft UUAs are proposed to be treated; Table 18). Again, these acreages and percentages are calculated factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burns leaving 40 percent of the crown intact. Although the proposed treatments may have an immediate impact on the visual quality of the IRA and draft UUA, these impacts would be short-term. As the area recovers from the treatments, and aspen start to regrow, wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics would recover, and would probably increase in quality in the long-term. This alternative proposes to mechanically treat 1,633 acres within IRAs and/or draft UUAs (Table 19). This alternative proposes to mechanically treat the least amount of acres within IRAs and draft UUAs.  Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property  The IRAs (Figure 26) and draft UUAs (Figure 27) adjacent to private property would have a 300-foot mechanical treatment buffer completed first (Figure 25). This 300-foot buffer of mechanical treatments would be completed first to prepare for the application of prescribed fire. The 300-foot buffer may be sufficient to minimize impacts from prescribed fire to private property. The specific acreages and percentages of each of the LRMP management areas are listed in Table 14. It is important to note that the 300-foot buffer distance was suggested by the public and was drawn on the maps (Figure 25 through Figure 27) without regard to topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas or wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc.  Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced  No mechanical or prescribed fire treatments would be conducted within Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs. A 300-foot mechanical treatment buffer would be created around the outside edge of the Northern goshawk PFAs (Figure 25). This 300-foot buffer of mechanical treatments would be completed first to prepare for the application of prescribed fire. It is important to note that the 300-foot buffer distance was suggested by the public and was drawn on the maps (Figure 25 through Figure 27 without regard to topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas or wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc. The 300-foot buffer may be sufficient to minimize impacts from prescribed fire to Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs.  Table 12. Alternative 2; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 3,146 Stable Aspen 4,025 Spruce/Fir 918 Mixed Conifer 97 Total 8,186   Table 13. Alternative 2; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 2 Seral Aspen 2,349 797 3,146 Stable Aspen 3,643 382 4,025 Spruce/Fir 472 446 918 Mixed Conifer 89 8 97 Total 6,553 1,633 8,186   Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded.  The areas around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake would be treated with prescribed fire only (Figure 25). No mechanical thinning treatments or temporary roads are proposed in these areas.   Table 14. Alternative 2 acreage and percentage by the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain 2B - Rural + Roaded Natural Recreation 4A - Fish Habitat Improvement 4B - Habitat for Management Indicator Species 5A - Big Game Winter Range-Non- Forested 6B - Intensive Livestock Management 7B - Wood Fiber Products- Through Genetics 9F - Improved Watershed Total MA Acres on Monroe Mountain 434 831 104,798 27,279 20,661 5,496 15,920 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 13 7,526 3 215 367 61 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of Management Area being Treated 0% 2% 7% 0% 1% 7% 0% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 189 20,238 784 7,110 2,151 2,512 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Treated 4 113 12,143 470 4,266 1,291 1,507 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 14% 12% 2% 21% 23% 9% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 15% 19% 2% 22% 30% 10%    Table 15. Alternative 2 acreage and temporary road mileage Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Prescribed Fire – Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of the Acres Get Burned Total Acres Total Acres Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Burned Miles of Temporary Roads 8,186 32,991 19,795 41,177 27,981 8.8         Table 16. Alternative 2 acreage by dominant vegetative type Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres; Figure 28) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres; Figure 29) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 97 4,183 2,510 Seral Aspen 3,146 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 4,025 7,991 4,795 Spruce/Fir 918 5,658 3,395 Total 8,186 32,991 19,795    Table 17. Alternative 2 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage and percent treated. IRA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All IRAs Combined Total IRA Acres 12,152 11,472 22,611 30,870 9,261 86,366 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 42 327 217 862 61 1,509 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 0% 3% 1% 3% 1% 2% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 816 2,615 6,707 13,492 2,001 25,632 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Treated 490 1,569 4,024 8,095 1,201 15,379 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 14% 18% 26% 13% 18% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 17% 19% 29% 14% 20%    Figure 25. Alternative 2 treatment areas  Figure 26. Alternative 2 treatment areas within Inventoried Roadless Areas. Figure 27. Alternative 2 treatment areas within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas Figure 28. Mechanical and slash burning acres by cover type for alternative 2 Figure 29. Prescribed fire acres by cover type for alternative 2  Table 18. Alternative 2 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. Draft UUA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All Draft UUAs Combined Total Draft UUA Acres 18,183 9,529 27,168 29,900 8,074 92,854 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 79 127 220 583 42 1,051 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 0% 1% 1% 2% 1% 1% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,645 2,033 8,296 10,530 1,864 24,368 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Treated 987 1,220 4,978 6,318 1,118 14,621 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 5% 13% 18% 21% 14% 16% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 6% 14% 19% 23% 14% 17%  Table 19. Alternative 2 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only. Stable Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 148 Stable Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 14 Stable Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 220 Seral Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 223 Seral Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 81 Seral Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 493 Spruce/Fir IRA Only (Acres) 211 Spruce/Fir UUA Only (Acres) 29 Spruce/Fir IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 206 Mixed Conifer IRA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer UUA Only (Acres) 1 Mixed Conifer IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 7 Total (Acres) 1,633 2.9.3 Alternative 3 Seral and Stable Aspen Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are two mechanical treatment options being analyzed for alternative 3 for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photo 13 through Photo 21; appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photo 14, Photo 17, and Photo 20; appendix A; Table 20). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (Photo 15, Photo 18, and Photo 21; appendix A; Table 21). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer.  Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are also two mechanical treatments options being analyzed for alternative 3 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer stands (Photo 22 through Photo 30; appendix A): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area (Photo 23, Photo 26, and Photo 28; appendix A; Table 20). a. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest). b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest). c. In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d. If no beetle killed or infected trees are present initially, live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection.  2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (Photo 24, Photo 27, and Photo 29; appendix A; Table 21). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer.  Roads: This alternative proposes to create 8.8 miles of temporary roads for access to mechanical treatment areas (same as alternative 2; Figure 45 through Figure 51).        Table 20. Alternative 3; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 6,422 Stable Aspen 4,780 Spruce/Fir 2,355 Mixed Conifer 91 Total 13,648  Table 21. Alternative 3; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 3 Seral Aspen 3,111 3,311 6,422 Stable Aspen 3,965 815 4,780 Spruce/Fir 835 1,520 2,355 Mixed Conifer 90 1 91 Total 8,001 5,647 13,648  The purpose of this alternative is to address issues 1 through 4 (section 1.15).  Issue 1 – Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within IRAs and draft UUAs may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation  Alternative 3 proposes to treat approximately 32,461 acres (Figure 30) of aspen and spruce/fir and mixed conifer (13,648 acres of mechanical with associated slash burning and 18,814 acres of prescribed burns with mixed burn severities factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burns leaving 40 percent of the crown intact (Table 23 and Table 24). Of the 32,461 acres, this alternative proposes to treat 19,608 acres within all IRAs (23 percent of all IRAs are proposed to be treated; Table 25), and 17,862 acres within draft UUAs (19 percent of all draft UUAs are proposed to be treated; Table 26). Again, these acreages and percentages are calculated factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burn, leaving 40 percent of the crown intact. Although the proposed treatments may have an immediate impact on the visual quality of the IRA and draft UUA, these impacts would be short-term. As the area recovers from the treatments, and aspen start to regrow, wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics would recover, and would probably increase in quality in the long-term. This alternative proposes to mechanically treat 5,647 acres within IRAs and/or draft UUAs (Table 27). This acreage is greater than that proposed for alternative 2, but less than what is proposed for alternatives 4 and 5 (Table 23 and Table 24).  Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property  The IRAs (Figure 31) and draft UUAs (Figure 32) adjacent to private property would have a wider mechanical treatment buffer than alternative 2 at approximately 0.5 mile wide (Figure 30). This wider buffer of mechanical treatments would be completed first in preparation for being able to implement prescribed fire on National Forest Lands while minimizing impacts to private property. The mechanical treatment buffers for this alternative were developed using topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas and wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc. The specific acreages and percentages of each of the LRMP management areas are listed in Table 22.  Table 22. Alternative 3 acreage and percentage of the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain 2B - Rural + Roaded Natural Recreation 4A - Fish Habitat Improvement 4B - Habitat for Management Indicator Species 5A - Big Game Winter Range-Non- Forested 6B - Intensive Livestock Management 7B - Wood Fiber Products- Through Genetics 9F - Improved Watershed Total MA Acres on Monroe Mountain 434 831 104,798 27,279 20,661 5,496 15,920 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 37 12,210 3 466 854 77 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 4% 12% 0% 2% 16% 0% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 201 18,785 787 7,000 2,027 2,551 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Treated 4 121 11,271 472 4,200 1,216 1,531 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 15% 11% 2% 20% 22% 10% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 19% 22% 2% 23% 38% 10%  Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced  Mechanical thinning treatments and the associated slash burning would occur within 18 Northern goshawk PFAs; however, no treatments would occur within the 18 NAs (Figure 30; Table 50). These mechanical treatments within the 18 PFAs would be completed first in preparation for being able to effectively implement pile burning inside the 18 PFAs and implement prescribed burning outside the 18 PFAs on National Forest Lands while minimizing impacts to the Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs. This would reduce the probability of impacts to Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs from prescribed fire activities. Impacts from mechanical treatments would be less than those in alternative 4, but greater than the impacts from alternatives 2 and 5.  Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded.  Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning and prescribed fire treatments would occur around the areas of Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake (Figure 30; Table 50). However, no temporary roads would be constructed to facilitate the mechanical treatments and associated slash burning activity in these areas. For this alternative, the mechanical treatments adjacent to Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake would be accomplished by hand and/or with the use of horses, helicopters, and/or cables.  Table 23. Alternative 3 acreage and temporary road mileage Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Prescribed Fire – Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of the Acres Get Burned Total Acres Total Acres Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Burned Miles of Temporary Roads 13,648 31,357 18,814 45,004 32,461 8.8  Table 24. Alternative 3 acreage by dominant vegetative type Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres; Figure 33) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres; Figure 34) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 91 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen 6,422 14,318 8,591 Stable Aspen 4,780 7,861 4,717 Spruce/Fir 2,355 4,988 2,993 Total 13,648 31,357 18,814  Figure 30. Alternative 3 treatment areas Figure 31. Alternative 3 treatment areas within Inventoried Roadless Areas   Figure 32. Alternative 3 treatment areas within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas  Figure 33. Mechanical treatment acreages by cover type for alternative 3 Figure 34. Prescribed fire treatments by cover type for alternative 3 Table 25. Alternative 3 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage and percent treated. IRA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All IRAs Combined Total IRA Acres 12,152 11,472 22,611 30,870 9,261 86,366 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 223 1,422 925 2,439 122 5,131 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 2% 12% 4% 8% 1% 6% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 857 1,814 6,679 12,718 2,061 24,129 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60 percent of Acres Get Treated 514 1,088 4,007 7,631 1,237 14,477 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 9% 18% 25% 13% 17% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 6% 22% 22% 33% 15% 23%    Table 26. Alternative 3 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. Draft UUA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All Draft UUAs Combined Total Draft UUA Acres 18,183 9,529 27,168 29,900 8,074 92,854 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 268 685 1,016 1,536 56 3,561 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 1% 7% 4% 5% 1% 4% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,722 1,490 8,263 10,454 1,906 23,835 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 1,033 894 4,958 6,272 1,144 14,301 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 6% 9% 18% 21% 14% 15% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 7% 17% 22% 26% 15% 19%      Table 27. Alternative 3 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only. Stable Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 403 Stable Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 46 Stable Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 366 Seral Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 929 Seral Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 361 Seral Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 2,021 Spruce/Fir IRA Only (Acres) 754 Spruce/Fir UUA Only (Acres) 109 Spruce/Fir IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 657 Mixed Conifer IRA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer UUA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 1 Total (Acres) 5,647 2.9.4 Alternative 4 Seral and Stable Aspen Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are two mechanical treatment options being analyzed for alternative 4 for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photo 13 through Photo 21; appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photo 14, Photo 17, and Photo 20; appendix A; Table 28). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (Photo 15, Photo 18, and Photo 21; appendix A; Table 29). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer.  Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are also two mechanical treatments options being analyzed for alternative 4 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Photo 22 through Photo 30; appendix A): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area (Photo 23, Photo 26, and Photo 28; appendix A; Table 12). a. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest). b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest). c. In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d. If no beetle killed or infected trees are present initially, live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (Photo 24, Photo 27, and Photo 29; appendix A; Table 29). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer.  Roads: This alternative proposes to create 13.3 miles of temporary roads for access to mechanical treatment areas (Figure 45 through Figure 51); 0.3 miles of these roads are proposed within the draft UUAs (Figure 37).  The purpose of this alternative is to address issues 1 through 4 (section 1.15).  Issue 1 – Impact to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within IRAs and draft UUAs may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation  Alternative 4 proposes to treat approximately 36,300 acres (Figure 35) of aspen and spruce/fir and mixed conifer (19,837 acres of mechanical and associated slash burning and 16,462 acres of prescribed burns with mixed burn severities factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burns, leaving 40 percent of the crown intact; Table 31 and Table 32). Of the 36,300 acres, this alternative proposes to treat 21,894 acres within all IRAs (25 percent of all IRAs are proposed to be treated; Table 33), and 19,642 acres within draft UUAs (21 percent of all draft UUAs are proposed to be treated; Table 34). Again, these acreages and percentages are calculated factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burn, leaving 40 percent of the crown intact. Although the proposed treatments may have an immediate impact on the visual quality of the IRA and draft UUA, these impacts would be short-term. As the area recovers from the treatments, and aspen start to regrow, wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics would recover, and would probably increase in quality in the long-term. This alternative proposes to mechanically treat 10,373 acres within IRAs and/or draft UUAs (Table 35). This acreage is the most proposed for this project and is greater than alternatives 2, 3, and 5 (Table 31 and Table 32).    Table 28. Alternative 4; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 9,492 Stable Aspen 6,130 Spruce/Fir 4,113 Mixed Conifer 102 Total 19,837  Table 29. Alternative 4; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 4 Seral Aspen 3,991 5,501 9,492 Stable Aspen 4,196 1,934 6,130 Spruce/Fir 1,186 2,927 4,113 Mixed Conifer 91 11 102 Total 9,464 10,373 19,837  Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property  The IRAs (Figure 36) and draft UUAs (Figure 37) adjacent to private property would have a wider mechanical treatment buffer than alternatives 2 and 3, and similar to alternative 5 at approximately 1.3 miles wide (Figure 35). This wider buffer of mechanical treatments would be completed first in preparation for being able effectively implement prescribed fire on National Forest Lands while minimizing impacts to private property. The mechanical treatment buffers for this alternative were developed using topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas and wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc. The specific acreages and percentages of each of the LRMP management areas are listed in Table 30.  Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced  Mechanical thinning treatments and the associated slash burning would occur within 18 Northern goshawk PFAs and within the 18 nest areas (Figure 35; Table 50). These mechanical treatments within the 18 PFAs and NAs would be completed first in preparation for being able to effectively implement pile burning inside the 18 PFAs and NAs and implement prescribed burning outside the 18 PFAs and NAs on National Forest Lands while minimizing impacts to the Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs. This would reduce the probability of impacts to Northern goshawk PFAs or NAs from prescribed fire activities. The potential impacts from mechanical treatment activities would be greatest in this alternative.  Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded.  Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning and prescription fire treatments would occur around the areas of Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake, and treatment areas are larger than proposed in alternative 3 (Figure 35). In addition, temporary roads would be constructed to facilitate the mechanical treatments and associated slash burning activity in these areas Figure 45 through Figure 51).  Table 30. Alternative 4 acreage and percentage of the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain 2B - Rural + Roaded Natural Recreation 4A - Fish Habitat Improvement 4B - Habitat for Management Indicator Species 5A - Big Game Winter Range-Non-Forested 6B - Intensive Livestock Management 7B - Wood Fiber Products- Through Genetics 9F - Improved Watershed Total MA Acres on Monroe Mountain 434 831 104,798 27,279 20,661 5,496 15,920 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 53 17,141 3 778 1,728 135 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 6% 16% 0% 4% 31% 1% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 196 15,675 787 6,785 1,469 2,518 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 4 118 9,405 472 4,071 881 1,511 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 14% 9% 2% 20% 16% 9% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 21% 25% 2% 23% 47% 10%        Table 31. Alternative 4 acreage and temporary road mileage Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Prescribed Fire – Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Total Acres Total Acres Factoring 60% of Acres Get Burned Miles of Temporary Roads 19,837 27,436 16,462 47,274 36,300 13.3  Table 32. Alternative 4 acreage by dominant vegetative type Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres; Figure 38) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres; Figure 39) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 102 4,178 2,507 Seral Aspen 9,492 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,130 6,693 4,016 Spruce/Fir 4,113 3,802 2,281 Total 19,837 27,436 16,462  Table 33. Alternative 4 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage and percent treated. IRA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All IRAs Combined Total IRA Acres 12,152 11,472 22,611 30,870 9,261 86,366 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 278 2,142 1,637 5,009 196 9,262 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 2% 19% 7% 16% 2% 11% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 857 1,228 6,246 10,661 2,061 21,053 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 514 737 3,748 6,397 1,237 12,632 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 6% 17% 21% 13% 15% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 7% 25% 24% 37% 15% 25%  Figure 35. Alternative 4 treatment areas  Figure 36. Alternative 4 treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas   Figure 37. Alternative 4 treatments within draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) Figure 38. Mechanical treatment acres by cover type for alternative 4 Figure 39. Prescribed fire treatment acres by cover type for alternative 4   Table 34. Alternative 4 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. UUA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All Draft UUAs Combined Total Draft UUA Acres 18,183 9,529 27,168 29,900 8,074 92,854 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 363 1,033 1,918 3,283 56 6,653 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 2% 11% 7% 11% 1% 7% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,722 1,141 7,706 9,174 1,906 21,649 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 1,033 685 4,624 5,504 1,144 12,989 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 6% 7% 17% 18% 14% 14% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 8% 18% 24% 29% 15% 21%   Table 35. Alternative 4 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only. Stable Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 901 Stable Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 153 Stable Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 880 Seral Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 1,384 Seral Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 732 Seral Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 3,385 Spruce/Fir IRA Only (Acres) 1,434 Spruce/Fir UUA Only (Acres) 226 Spruce/Fir IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 1,267 Mixed Conifer IRA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer UUA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 11 Total (Acres) 10,373 2.9.5 Alternative 5 Seral and Stable Aspen Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are two mechanical treatment options being analyzed for alternative 5 for seral and stable aspen dominated stands (Photo 13 through Photo 21; appendix A):  1. Conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer or if it is located within an IRA or draft UUA. (Photo 14, Photo 17, and Photo 20; appendix A; Table 36). To access the conifer, some incidental cutting of aspen may occur. This option would occur throughout the project area. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH and the existing aspen would be retained (Photo 15, Photo 18, and Photo 21; appendix A; Table 37). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, conifers would be removed and the existing aspen would be retained regardless of the size of the conifer.  Spruce/Fir and Mixed Conifer Stands – Proposed Mechanical Treatment Methods  There are also two mechanical treatments options being analyzed for alternative 5 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Photo 22 through Photo 30; appendix A): 1. This option would occur throughout the project area (Photo 23, Photo 26, and Photo 28; appendix A; Table 36). a. If present, beetle killed conifer trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (salvage harvest). b. If conifer trees are currently infected by beetles and are in the process of dying, the infected trees would be removed while ensuring consistency with the LRMP for snags and down woody debris (sanitation harvest). c. In areas of spruce/fir or mixed conifer where LRMP stocking levels are below plan guidance due to bark beetle impacts, replanting of spruce or mixed conifer may occur. If the remaining live trees were greater than a BA of 90, the remaining live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. d. If no beetle killed or infected trees are present initially, live trees would be thinned using uneven-aged management to a BA of 90 with single and group tree selection. 2. Within IRAs and draft UUAs, conifer would be thinned from below up to 8 inch DBH (Photo 24, Photo 27, and Photo 29; appendix A; Table 37). In all areas outside the IRAs and draft UUAs, treatments would occur as in option 1 for spruce/fir and mixed conifer.  Roads: This alternative proposes to create 12.8 miles of temporary roads for access to treatment areas (Figure 45 through Figure 51); 1.3 miles of roads are proposed within draft UUAs (Figure 42).         Table 36. Alternative 5; Option 1--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 6,736 Stable Aspen 5,340 Spruce/Fir 2,905 Mixed Conifer 91 Total 15,072  The purpose of this alternative is to address issues 1 through 4 (section 1.15).  Issue 1 – Impact to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within IRAs and draft UUAs may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation  Alternative 5 proposes to treat approximately 30,944 acres (Figure 40) of aspen and spruce/fir and mixed conifer (15,072 acres of mechanical and associated slash burning and 15,872 acres of prescribed burns with mixed burn severities factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burn; leaving 40 percent of the crown intact; Table 39 and Table 40). Of the 30,944 acres, this alternative proposes to treat 19,245 acres within all IRAs (22 percent of all IRAs are proposed to be treated; Table 41), and 17,675 acres within draft UUAs (19 percent of all draft UUAs are proposed to be treated; Table 42). Again, these acreages and percentages are calculated factoring that approximately 60 percent of the total area treated with prescribed fire burn, leaving 40 percent of the crown intact. Although the proposed treatments may have an immediate impact on the visual quality of the IRA and draft UUA, these impacts would be short-term. As the area recovers from the treatments, and aspen start to regrow, wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics would recover, and would probably increase in quality in the long-term. This alternative proposes to mechanically treat 7,621 acres within IRAs and/or draft UUAs (Table 43). This acreage is greater than that proposed for alternatives 2 and 3, but less than what is proposed for alternative 4 (Table 39 and Table 40).  Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property  The IRAs (Figure 41) and draft UUAs (Figure 42) adjacent to private property would have a similar mechanical treatment buffer to alternative 3 with variations occurring where Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs occur adjacent to private property (Figure 40). The buffer adjacent to private property would be wider than alternatives 2 and 3, and similar to alternative 4 at approximately 1.3 miles wide. Where Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs occur, the mechanical treatment buffers mostly occur along the outside edge of the PFAs (the exception being with two of the PFAs located adjacent to private property that are proposed for treatment; no NAs would be treated) (Figure 40; Table 50). This buffer of mechanical treatment would be completed first in preparation for being able to implement prescribed fire on National Forest Lands while minimizing impacts to private property and Northern goshawk areas. The mechanical treatment buffers for this alternative were developed using topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas and wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc. The specific acreages and percentages of each of the LRMP management areas are listed in Table 38.  Table 37. Alternative 5; Option 2--Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning for seral and stable aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer dominated stands  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Outside IRAs and UUAs) Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres Inside IRAs and UUAs) Project Total Alternative 5 Seral Aspen 2,547 4,189 6,736 Stable Aspen 3,830 1,510 5,340 Spruce/Fir 984 1,921 2,905 Mixed Conifer 90 1 91 Total 7,451 7,621 15,072  Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced  Mechanical thinning treatments and the associated slash burning would occur within 2 of the 18 Northern goshawk PFAs that occur in proposed treatment areas, and no treatments would occur in any of the 18 NAs (Figure 40). Mechanical treatment buffers around the outside edge of the other 16 PFAs would be approximately 0.6 miles wide. The mechanical treatment buffers for this alternative were developed using topography (slope, ridgetops, drainage bottoms, etc.), natural fuel breaks, previous treatment areas and wildland fires, existing roads and trails, etc. These mechanical treatments within the 2 PFAs and around the outside edge of the other 16 PFAs would be completed first in preparation for implementation of pile burning inside the 2 PFAs and prescribed burning outside the PFAs on National Forest Lands to minimize impacts to Northern goshawk PFAs and NAs. Impacts from mechanical treatments would be less than that in alternatives 3 and 4 but greater than those in alternative 2.  Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded.  Mechanical treatments with associated slash burning and prescribed fire treatments would occur around the areas of Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake, and treatment areas are similar to those proposed in alternative 3 (Figure 40). In addition, temporary roads would be constructed to facilitate the mechanical treatments and associated slash burning activity in and adjacent to these areas.   Table 38. Alternative 5 acreage and percentage of the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP) management areas (MAs) on Monroe Mountain LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain 2B - Rural + Roaded Natural Recreation 4A - Fish Habitat Improvement 4B - Habitat for Management Indicator Species 5A - Big Game Winter Range-Non- Forested 6B - Intensive Livestock Management 7B - Wood Fiber Products- Through Genetics 9F - Improved Watershed Total MA Acres on Monroe Mountain 434 831 104,798 27,279 20,661 5,496 15,920 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 70 13,162 0 602 1,142 96 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 8% 13% 0% 3% 21% 1% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 132 14,769 787 6,850 1,377 2,532 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 4 79 8,861 472 4,110 826 1,519 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 10% 8% 2% 20% 15% 10% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 18% 21% 2% 23% 36% 10%   Table 39. Alternative 5 acreage and temporary road mileage Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Prescribed Fire – Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Total Acres Total Acres Factoring 60% of Acres Get Burned Miles of Temporary Roads 15,072 26,453 91 15,872 41,525 30,944 12.8  Table 40. Alternative 5 acreage by dominant vegetative type Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres; Figure 43) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres; Figure 44) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Mixed Conifer 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen 6,736 11,676 7,006 Stable Aspen 5,340 6,777 4,066 Spruce/Fir 2,905 3,810 2,286 Total 15,072 26,453 15,872 Figure 40. Alternative 5 treatment areas  Figure 41. Alternative 5 treatment areas within Inventoried Roadless Areas Figure 42. Alternative 5 treatment areas within draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas with associated roads Figure 43. Mechanical treatment acres by cover type for alternative 5 Figure 44. Prescribed fire treatment acres by cover type for alternative 5 Table 41. Alternative 5 Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRA) acreage and percent treated. IRA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All IRAs Combined Total IRA Acres 12,152 11,472 22,611 30,870 9,261 86,366 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 317 1,228 1,517 3,478 317 6,857 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 3% 11% 7% 11% 3% 8% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 540 1,714 5,593 11,055 1,744 20,646 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 324 1,028 3,356 6,633 1,046 12,388 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 3% 9% 15% 21% 11% 14% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 5% 20% 22% 33% 15% 22%    Table 42. Alternative 5 draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and percent treated. UUA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All Draft UUAs Combined Total Draft UUA Acres 18,183 9,529 27,168 29,900 8,074 92,854 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 513 669 1,621 2,426 285 5,514 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 3% 7% 6% 8% 4% 6% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,209 1,490 7,085 8,864 1,620 20,268 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 725 894 4,251 5,318 972 12,161 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 4% 9% 16% 18% 12% 13% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 7% 16% 22% 26% 16% 19%       Table 43. Alternative 5 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage and overlap for mechanical treatments only. Stable Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 478 Stable Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 139 Stable Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 893 Seral Aspen IRA Only (Acres) 713 Seral Aspen UUA Only (Acres) 483 Seral Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 2,993 Spruce/Fir IRA Only (Acres) 916 Spruce/Fir UUA Only (Acres) 141 Spruce/Fir IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 864 Mixed Conifer IRA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer UUA Only (Acres) 0 Mixed Conifer IRA & UUA Overlap (Acres) 1 Total (Acres) 7,621 2.10 Comparison of Alternatives This section provides a summary of the effects of implementing each alternative. Information in the tables is focused on activities and effects where different levels of effects or outputs can be distinguished quantitatively or qualitatively among alternatives. The major issues driving the alternatives and analysis include:  1. Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within IRAs and draft UUAs may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation; 2. Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property; 3. Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced; 4. Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad habitat being severely degraded. 5. Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands; 6. Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons); and 7. Project activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics.  The following tables and figures show the acreage comparisons between alternatives based on the acreages and miles of temporary roads (Table 44; Figure 45 through Figure 51); acreages by dominant vegetative types (Table 45); acreages by LRMP management areas (Table 46); acreages and percentages by IRA (Table 47); acreages and percentages by draft UUA (Table 48); mechanical treatment acreages by IRA and draft UUA that overlap (Table 49), and number of Northern goshawk PFA and NA areas being mechanically treated (Table 50).  Table 44. Comparison of alternatives by acreages and miles of temporary roads  Mechanical Treatments and Associated Slash Burning Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Prescribed Fire – Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Total Acres Total Acres Factoring 60% of Acres Get Burned Miles of Temp Roads/Acres Disturbed Alternative 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Alternative 2 8,186 32,991 19,795 41,177 27,981 8.8/21 Alternative 3 13,647 31,357 18,814 45,004 32,461 8.8/21 Alternative 4 19,838 27,436 16,462 47,274 36,300 13.3/32 Alternative 5 15,072 26,453 15,872 41,525 30,944 12.8/31  Table 45. Comparison of alternatives by dominant vegetative type  Existing Vegetation Mechanical and Associated Slash Burning (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Alternative 1 **** 0 0 0 Alternative 2 Mixed Conifer 97 4,183 2,510 Seral Aspen 3,146 15,159 9,095 Stable Aspen 4,025 7,991 4,795 Spruce/Fir 918 5,658 3,395 Total 8,186 32,991 19,795 Alternative 3 Mixed Conifer 91 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen 6,422 14,318 8,591 Stable Aspen 4,780 7,861 4,717 Spruce/Fir 2,355 4,988 2,993 Total 13,648 31,357 18,814 Alternative 4 Mixed Conifer 102 4,178 2,507 Seral Aspen 9,492 12,763 7,658 Stable Aspen 6,130 6,693 4,016 Spruce/Fir 4,113 3,802 2,281 Total 19,837 27,436 16,462 Alternative 5 Mixed Conifer 91 4,190 2,514 Seral Aspen 6,736 11,676 7,006 Stable Aspen 5,340 6,777 4,066 Spruce/Fir 2,905 3,810 2,286 Total 15,072 26,453 15,872 Table 46. Comparison of Alternatives by LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain  LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain 2B - Rural + Roaded Natural Recreation 4A - Fish Habitat Improvement 4B - Habitat for Management Indicator Species 5A - Big Game Winter Range- Non-Forested 6B - Intensive Livestock Management 7B - Wood Fiber Products- Through Genetics 9F - Improved Watershed  Total MA Acres on Monroe Mountain 434 831 104,798 27,279 20,661 5,496 15,920 Alternative 1 Acres Being Treated 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Alternative 2 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 13 7,526 3 215 367 61 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 2% 7% 0% 1% 7% 0% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 189 20,238 784 7,110 2,151 2,512 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 4 113 12,143 470 4,266 1,291 1,507 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 14% 12% 2% 21% 23% 9% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 15% 19% 2% 22% 30% 10% Alternative 3 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 37 12,210 3 466 854 77 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 4% 12% 0% 2% 16% 0% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 201 18,785 787 7,000 2,027 2,551 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 4 121 11,271 472 4,200 1,216 1,531 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 15% 11% 2% 20% 22% 10% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 19% 22% 2% 23% 38% 10% Alternative 4 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 53 17,141 3 778 1,728 135 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 6% 16% 0% 4% 31% 1% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 196 15,675 787 6,785 1,469 2,518 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 4 118 9,405 472 4,071 881 1,511  LRMP MA on Monroe Mountain 2B - Rural + Roaded Natural Recreation 4A - Fish Habitat Improvement 4B - Habitat for Management Indicator Species 5A - Big Game Winter Range- Non-Forested 6B - Intensive Livestock Management 7B - Wood Fiber Products- Through Genetics 9F - Improved Watershed  Total MA Acres on Monroe Mountain 434 831 104,798 27,279 20,661 5,496 15,920 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 14% 9% 2% 20% 16% 9% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 21% 25% 2% 23% 47% 10% Alternative 5 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 0 70 13,162 0 602 1,142 96 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of MA being Treated 0% 8% 13% 0% 3% 21% 1% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 6 132 14,769 787 6,850 1,377 2,532 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 4 79 8,861 472 4,110 826 1,519 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 10% 8% 2% 20% 15% 10% All Treatments Combined Percent of MA Being Treated 1% 18% 21% 2% 23% 36% 10%  Table 47. Comparison of Alternatives by Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA)  IRA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All IRAs Combined  Total IRA Acres 12,152 11,472 22,611 30,870 9,261 86,366 Alternative 1 Acres Being Treated 0 0 0 0 0 0 Alternative 2 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 42 327 217 862 61 1,509 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 0% 3% 1% 3% 1% 2% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 816 2,615 6,707 13,492 2,001 25,632 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 490 1,569 4,024 8,095 1,201 15,379  IRA Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All IRAs Combined  Total IRA Acres 12,152 11,472 22,611 30,870 9,261 86,366 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 14% 18% 26% 13% 18% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 17% 19% 29% 14% 20% Alternative 3 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 223 1,422 925 2,439 122 5,131 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 2% 12% 4% 8% 1% 6% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 857 1,814 6,679 12,718 2,061 24,129 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 514 1,088 4,007 7,631 1,237 14,477 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 9% 18% 25% 13% 17% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 6% 22% 22% 33% 15% 23% Alternative 4 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 278 2,142 1,637 5,009 196 9,262 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 2% 19% 7% 16% 2% 11% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 857 1,228 6,246 10,661 2,061 21,053 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 514 737 3,748 6,397 1,237 12,632 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 4% 6% 17% 21% 13% 15% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 7% 25% 24% 37% 15% 25% Alternative 5 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 317 1,228 1,517 3,478 317 6,857 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA being Treated 3% 11% 7% 11% 3% 8% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 540 1,714 5,593 11,055 1,744 20,646 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 324 1,028 3,356 6,633 1,046 12,388 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Being Treated 3% 9% 15% 21% 11% 14% All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated 5% 20% 22% 33% 15% 22% Table 48. Comparison of Alternatives by draft UUA  Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All Draft UUAs Combined  Total Draft UUA Acres 18,183 9,529 27,168 29,900 8,074 92,854 Alternative 1 Acres Being Treated 0 0 0 0 0 0 Alternative 2 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 79 127 220 583 42 1,051 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 0% 1% 1% 2% 1% 1% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,645 2,033 8,296 10,530 1,864 24,368 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 987 1,220 4,978 6,318 1,118 14,621 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 5% 13% 18% 21% 14% 16% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 6% 14% 19% 23% 14% 17% Alternative 3 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 268 685 1,016 1,536 56 3,561 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 1% 7% 4% 5% 1% 4% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,722 1,490 8,263 10,454 1,906 23,835 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 1,033 894 4,958 6,272 1,144 14,301 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 6% 9% 18% 21% 14% 15% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 7% 17% 22% 26% 15% 19% Alternative 4 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 363 1,033 1,918 3,283 56 6,653 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 2% 11% 7% 11% 1% 7% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,722 1,141 7,706 9,174 1,906 21,649 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 1,033 685 4,624 5,504 1,144 12,989 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 6% 7% 17% 18% 14% 14% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 8% 18% 24% 29% 15% 21%  Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) Langdon Little Creek Marysvale Peak Signal Peak Tibadore All Draft UUAs Combined Alternative 5 Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) 513 669 1,621 2,426 285 5,514 Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA being Treated 3% 7% 6% 8% 4% 6% Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) 1,209 1,490 7,085 8,864 1,620 20,268 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated 725 894 4,251 5,318 972 12,161 Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Being Treated 4% 9% 16% 18% 12% 13% All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated 7% 16% 22% 26% 16% 19%  Table 49. IRA and draft UUA Acreage Overlap Acreages Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Stable Aspen IRA Only 0 148 403 901 478 Stable Aspen UUA Only 0 14 46 153 139 Stable Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap 0 220 366 880 893 Seral Aspen IRA Only 0 223 929 1,384 713 Seral Aspen UUA Only 0 81 361 732 483 Seral Aspen IRA & UUA Overlap 0 493 2,021 3,385 2,993 Spruce/Fir IRA Only 0 211 754 1,434 916 Spruce/Fir UUA Only 0 29 109 226 141 Spruce/Fir IRA & UUA Overlap 0 206 657 1,267 864 Mixed Conifer IRA Only 0 0 0 0 0 Mixed Conifer UUA Only 0 1 0 0 0 Mixed Conifer IRA & UUA Overlap 0 7 1 11 1 Total 0 1,633 5,647 10,373 7,621      Table 50. Number of Goshawk nest areas (NAs) and post-fledgling areas (PFAs) being mechanically treated  Number of PFAs Being Mechanically Treated Number of NAs Being Mechanically Treated Alternative 1 0 0 Alternative 2 0 0 Alternative 3 18 0 Alternative 4 18 18 Alternative 5 2 0 2.11 Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Further Analysis and Record of the Evolution of the Proposed Action and Alternatives Federal agencies are required by NEPA to rigorously explore and objectively evaluate all reasonable alternatives and to briefly discuss the reasons for eliminating any alternatives that were not developed in detail (40 CFR 1502.14). Public comments received in response to the Notice of Intent provided suggestions for alternative methods for achieving the purpose and need. These alternatives may not have been carried forward for additional analysis because they were outside the scope of the purpose and need, duplicative of the alternatives considered in detail, or determined to be components that would cause unnecessary environmental harm. The following alternatives were considered, but not carried forward for additional analysis in this final environmental impact statement for reasons summarized below. This section also serves as the record to show the evolution of the proposed action and alternatives from the NOI, the development of the proposed action, the development of the alternatives, and through the writing of this final environmental impact statement.  Figure 45. Area 1 temporary roads  Figure 46. Area 2 temporary roads Figure 47. Area 3 temporary roads Figure 48. Area 4 temporary roads  Figure 49. Area 5 temporary roads  Figure 50. Area 6 temporary roads Figure 51. Area 7 temporary roads   No Mechanical Thinning 2.11.1 Treatments within Inventoried Roadless Areas, draft Unroaded- Undeveloped Areas The Forest considered an alternative to exclude all mechanical thinning treatments within IRAs and UUAs. However, this alternative was not carried forward for additional analysis because by excluding mechanical thinning treatments within these areas, fire personnel would not be able to safely and effectively use prescribed fire to restore aspen ecosystems, move aspen towards desired conditions, and meet the purpose and need of this project while minimizing impacts to private property, old growth areas, Northern goshawk home ranges, and important aquatic resources. The current fuel-loads in these areas are not conducive to the safe utilization of prescription fire only. 2.11.2 Clearcut Seral and Stable Aspen Stands The Forest considered an alternative to clearcut seral and stable aspen stands and any mixed conifer that may be in those stands. Although this alternative would likely result in the maximum response of aspen suckering and regrowth it was not carried forward for additional analysis due to the following:  1. Visual concerns (related to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics); and, 2. The existing multi-height aspen would be lost resulting in a longer timeframe to accomplish the desired condition of having multi-height aspen. 3. Old growth concerns. 2.11.3 Remove conifer first. If the remaining aspen have a stand density index greater than 140, then thin the remaining aspen to a stand density index of 140. For treatments in seral and stable aspen stands, the Forest considered a proposal to remove the conifer from an aspen stand first. If the remaining aspen had a stand density index greater than 140, then the remaining aspen would be thinned to a stand density index of 140. This alternative would likely stimulate aspen suckering due to the disturbance from removing conifer and perhaps some aspen. However, this alternative was not carried forward for additional analysis due to the following:  1. It would be difficult to implement as marking and treating these stands would require a high level of expertise that is not available on the scale needed to implement the project; and, 2. Implementation of this alternative would be more costly compared to just removing conifers.  Temporary Fencing of 2.11.4 all Treated Areas to Exclude Ungulate Browsing on Aspen Shoots The Forest considered an alternative to install temporary fence around all the treatment areas to exclude browsing of aspen shoots by both wild and domestic livestock. However, this alternative was not carried forward for additional analysis due to the following:  1. The extent of the project area and the associated expense to fence (approximately 4 dollars per foot for materials and construction) (maintenance cost for 4 to 6 years would be additional); and, 2. Fencing all treatment areas does not address overbrowsing as one of the underlying causes for aspen decline on Monroe Mountain. 2.11.5 Sequencing – Begin mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on the north end of Monroe Mountain and work in a southerly direction. The Forest considered an alternative to begin mechanical and prescribed fire treatments on the north end of Monroe Mountain and work in a southerly direction. Wildlife studies on Monroe Mountain indicate the highest wildlife (elk and deer) use on Monroe Mountain occurs in the central portion followed by the northerly portion with the least use occurring in the southerly portion. Beginning treatments in the south where wildlife use is less, the District would be able to monitor treatments, learn, and adjust prior to initiating treatments in the north and central portions where wildlife use is higher. After considering the distribution of wildlife on Monroe Mountain, the alternative of beginning treatments in the north and working in a southerly direction was not carried forward for additional analysis (Figure 22). 2.11.6 Jack-strawing within all mechanical treatment areas The District considered an alternative to leave additional material than what is required by the Land and Resource Management Plan in all the mechanical treatment areas to assist with jackstrawing (leaving material on the ground to help impede ungulates from moving into newly treated areas). However, this alternative was not carried forward for additional analysis due to:   1. If extra material for jack-strawing was left on the ground it would be more difficult for fire personnel to safely and effectively implement prescribed fire while minimizing impacts to private property, Northern goshawks, Bonneville cutthroat trout, and boreal toads; 2. After the Oldroyd fire in 2000, fire crews purposely jack-strawed material in areas that burned. However, this jack-strawing was not effective as ungulates were still able to access burned areas and browse new aspen shoots; 3. Jack-strawing would be an additional cost to implementing the mechanical treatments; and, 4. Material being left for jack-strawing may attract bark beetles, thus increasing the risk of infestation to otherwise healthy trees.  Although the District did not consider jack-strawing to occur within all mechanical treatment areas, jack-strawing on a small scale, in site-specific areas to help impede ungulate access is still warranted, and could occur.  3 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES  This chapter summarizes the physical, biological, social, and economic environments of the project area and the effects of implementing each alternative by the issues outlined in chapter 1 and 2. It also presents the scientific and analytical basis for the comparison of alternatives presented here. The detailed analyses presented in this document are only for those resources that were identified as issues in chapter 1 and 2. All other resource analyses can be found in the specific specialists resource reports that are hereby incorporated by reference (see section 3.6.4) and attached, in their entirety, as appendices to this document. In addition, the referenced specialist reports are available for viewing on the Fishlake National Forest’s website: www.fs.usda.gov/projects/fishlake/landmanagement/projects. 3.1 Issue 1 – Impacts to wilderness attributes and roadless area characteristics resulting from mechanical treatments within inventoried roadless areas and draft unroaded-undeveloped areas may result in these areas not being eligible for wilderness designation This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystem Restoration Project Inventoried Roadless & Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas Specialist Report (Christensen 2015a; appendix K in this EIS). 3.1.1 Affected Environment Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) represent some of the largest and most extensive tracts of undeveloped land; having pristine, sensitive, and roadless characteristics (USFS 1976). Theoretically, to be classified as an IRA, areas must not contain constructed roads and generally are at least 5,000 acres. A roadless area is also defined as an area that meets the minimum criteria for wilderness. The Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project includes five IRAs that may be affected. These include Signal Peak, Little Creek, Marysvale Peak, Tibadore, and Langdon. These five IRAs cover a total 86,366 acres, which is 49 percent of the project area for the EIS. Within these IRAs, there are many examples of modern human control, manipulation, and civilization in the form of structures, roads (including constructed roads), and other evidence of occupation. The experience of solitude and primitive unconfined recreation is hard to find due to motorized roads and trails, private land developments, dams, waterlines, ditches, relatively skinny strips of IRA, mining, range improvements, and timber harvest. There are beautiful landscape features and views of the surrounding valleys. Only the south portion of the Signal Peak IRA seems to hold a reasonable opportunity for manageability as wilderness due to its size and roadless characteristics (see Figure 52). 2410MonroeAspenRestoration_IRA  Figure 52. Existing Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) and acreages on Monroe Mountain   2410MonroeAspenRestoration_UUA Figure 53. Existing draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) and acreages on Monroe Mountain     Within the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project area there are also five draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas (USFS 2004b; UUAs) of the same names and general locations as the five IRAs. These areas represent the latest draft inventory data for areas with potential wilderness qualities or attributes. The term “undeveloped area” refers to a geographic area usually of at least 5,000 acres, without developed and maintained roads, and substantially natural. There is no policy, law, or directive guiding the management of identified draft unroaded/ undeveloped areas that lie outside of IRAs or wilderness areas. These five draft UUAs cover a total of 92,854 acres which is 53 percent of the project area for the EIS. Within these draft UUAs there are many examples of modern human control, manipulation, and civilization in the form of structures, roads and other evidence of occupation. The experience of solitude and primitive unconfined recreation is hard to find due to motorized roads and trails, private land developments, dams, waterlines, ditches, relatively skinny strips of draft UUA, mining, range improvements, and power lines. There are beautiful landscape features and views of the surrounding valleys. Only the south portion of the Signal Peak draft UUA seems to hold a reasonable opportunity for manageability as wilderness due to its size and roadless characteristics (see Figure 53).  Figure 53 on the following page displays the existing Monroe Mountain draft UUAs and their associated acreages.  Table 51 through Table 58 describe the existing conditions of the IRAs and draft UUAs on Monroe Mountain. Table 59 through Table 62 outline the wilderness quality or attributes and the roadless characteristics for each IRA and draft UUA.  Table 51. General descriptions of existing Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) on Monroe Mountain (USFS 1983).  Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Total Acres 30,870 11,472 22,611 9,261 12,152 % Project Area 18% 7% 13% 5% 7% Location Northwest Northeast Middle West Southwest Southeast Area Description Very irregular in shape with six less than 2 mile wide strips and a larger south central area of 7 by 5 miles Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 10 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 14 miles long Irregular in shape with the widest point being 3.5 miles wide and 7 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 8 miles long Adjacent Lands to the West Private, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest BLM, State, National Forest National Forest Adjacent Lands to the East Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest National Forest Private, State, BLM  Table 52. General descriptions of existing draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) on Monroe Mountain  Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Total Acres 29,900 9,529 27,168 8,074 18,183 % Project Area 17% 5% 15% 5% 10% Location Northwest Northeast Middle West Southwest Southeast Area Description Very irregular in shape with a long less than 3 mile wide area and a larger south central area of 6 by 5 miles Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 2 miles wide and 7 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 4 miles wide and 16 miles long Irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 5 miles long Very irregular in shape with the widest point being 3 miles wide and 13 miles long Adjacent Lands to the West Private, State, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest BLM, State, National Forest National Forest Adjacent Lands to the East Private, National Forest Private, BLM, National Forest Private, National Forest National Forest State, Private, BLM, National Forest   Table 53. Existing IRA system roads and trails System Routes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Level 2 Roads (Open to all vehicles, yet may be very rough) About 4 miles #1209, #2700, #1211, #1148, #080, #288, #068 #1150, #2037 About 4 miles #2004, #1159, #1160, #166 About 4.5 miles #075, #1185, #1187, #1188, #1189, #1194, #1230, #182 About 1.5 miles #1782, #1196, #1197, #200 About 1.5 miles #1809, #1202 Level 1 Roads (Administrative use only) About 5.5 miles #168, #170, #171, #172, #810 About 0.5 mile Little Creek   About 2 miles Dead Horse Rock Canyon Trails Open to All Vehicles About 0.5 mile #762, #984, #932 About 0.5 mile #911, #912, #909, #910 About 2 miles #915, #919, #920 #916, #917, #918 #922, #924, #992 #926, #925 About 0.5 mile #941 About 0.0625 mile #971 System Routes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA 60” Motorized Trails About 4.5 miles #950, #956, #763 #763A, #955, #761, #762, #761A, #761B About 0.25 mile #913 About 0.5 mile #812, #814, #923  About 5 miles #868, PST63 50” Motorized Trails About 2 miles PST 66 About 7.5 miles #764, #767 #260, #807, #793, Paiute 01 About 12 miles PST65, #088, #088A, #088B, #088C, #088D, #194, #837, #840 #841, #842, #833 #834, #843, #835 #845, #898, #969  About 2 miles #250, #859, #856 Total Miles of System Roads and Trails 16.5 miles 12.75 miles 19 miles 2 miles 10.5 miles  Table 54. Existing IRA non-system roads Non-System Roads Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Closed roads that still have a constructed footprint on the ground About 3.5 miles Norton Creek Bertelson Can. Nielson Can. Signal Peak About 3 miles Kinney Spring Little Creek East Hunter Flat About 2.5 miles Live Oak Bean Hill Manning Cr. Straight Can. Dry Canyon About 2 miles Tuft Draw Buck Hollow Hell Hole   Table 55. Existing draft UUA system roads and trails System Routes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Level 2 Roads (Open to all vehicles, yet may be very rough) About 0.5 mile #1209, #2700 About 0.5 mile #1159   About 0.5 mile #068X, #082B System Routes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Level 1 Roads (Administrative use only)  About 0.5 mile Little Creek    Trails Open to All Vehicles      60” Motorized Trails About 1 mile #763, #103, #761 #761A, #763A    About 3 miles PST63 50” Motorized Trails About 2 miles PST 66 About 4 miles #260, #807, #793 About 14 miles PST65, #088, #088A, #088B, #088C, #088D, #815A, #815B, #194, #837, #840 #841, #842, #833 #834, #843, #835 #089, #898, #969  About 9 miles #250, #859, #853, #852, PST53, PST53A, PST33, #856 Total Miles of System Roads and Trails  3.5 miles  5 miles  14 miles    12.5 miles  Table 56. Existing draft UUA non-system roads Non-System Roads Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Closed roads that still have a constructed footprint on the ground About 4 miles Red Butte Can. Thompson Cr. Winget Can. Bertelson Can. Order Dugway Nielson Can. About 3 miles Kinney Spring Little Creek East Hunter Flat About 3 miles Oak Flat Live Oak Dry Canyon Manning Cr. Straight Can. Bean Hill About 1 mile Tuft Draw     Table 57. Existing IRA human developments and structures  Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Range Improvements Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines, tanks and fences Culinary Water Developments Norton Creek Monroe Creek     Irrigation Water Developments Serviceberry Cr. Koosharem Can. Anderson Can. Flat Canyon   Waterlines and Pipelines Norton Creek Monroe Canyon Koosharem Can. Anderson Can. Flat Can.   Dams Annabella Res. Deep Lake Washburn Res.  Hunts Lake (Upper & Lower)   Ditches Deep Lake Annabella  Hunts Lake Manning Creek Concrete   Timber Harvest Monument Peak Annabella Cove Mtn. Monroe Peak Whooton Spr. Doe Flat Dry Creek Nielson Can. Collins Creek Big Flat Aspen Langdon Dry Lake Langdon Erosion Control Terracing Thompson Basin  Live Oak Hunts Lake Monroe Peak Anderson Can.   Mining Bertelson Can  Manning Creek Durkee Spr. Miners Ridge Windy Ridge Tibadore Can.  Fire Annabella Flat  Marysvale Peak Blackbird Mine   Prescribed Fire Monument Peak Kinney Spring Little Table Bean Hill Tuft Draw Buck Hollow Deer Spring Tibadore Pond Rock Canyon Pine Canyon Jackie Canyon Schaffers  Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Other Mud Lake Cabin  Old Monrovian Park Rec Site Blue Peak  Brush saw work Nielson Can. Sawmills & Piles  Windy Ridge Cabins, Barn, etc.  Manning Cr. Old Tunnel (100 feet)      Table 58. Existing draft UUA human developments and structures  Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Range Improvements Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines and fences Ponds, troughs, waterlines, tanks and fences Culinary Water Developments Red Butte Creek Norton Creek Monroe Canyon     Irrigation Water Developments Maple Canyon     Waterlines and Pipelines Maple Canyon Red Butte Creek Norton Creek Monroe Canyon 1st Left Hand Cr.     Dams Washburn Res.     Ditches  Mill Creek to Little Creek Manning Creek Concrete   Timber Harvest   Sawmill Flat    Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Erosion Control Terracing Thompson Basin   Live Oak Hunts Lake Monroe Peak Anderson Can.   Mining Bertelson Can.  Manning Creek Miners Ridge Windy Ridge Tibadore Can.  Fire Annabella Flat  Marysvale Peak Blackbird Mine   Prescribed Fire Thompson Basin Monument Peak Kinney Spring   Rock Canyon Pine Canyon Jackie Canyon Other Mud Lake Cabin  Old Monrovian Park Rec Site  Neilson Can. Sawmills & Piles  Windy Ridge Cabins, Barn, etc.  Manning Cr. Old Tunnel (100 feet)                    Table 59. Existing IRA Wilderness quality or attributes. The overall ratings are taken from the RAREII evaluation of roadless areas (USFS 1979). Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Untrammeled - This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails dams, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, mining, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, cabins, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Untrammeled Overall Rating Moderate Low Moderate Moderate Low Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails dams, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, cabins, erosion control terracing, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire.  Natural Overall Rating Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Low Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation; it is essentially without permanent improvements or modern human occupation. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails dams, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern human presence or occupation: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Undeveloped Overall Rating Moderate Moderate High High Moderate Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, dams, waterlines, timber harvest, range improvements, erosion control terracing, and an irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, waterlines, timber harvest, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, dams, waterlines, mining, timber harvest, range improvements, cabins, erosion control terracing, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS)  Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 50%), and Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized (about 50%).  Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, waterlines, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 10%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized Natural (about 40%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 60%).  (about 90%). physical and mental challenge.  (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 5%), Semi- Primitive Motorized (about 5%), and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 90%). The southern portion contains a larger continuous land area that is Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized which could allow for solitude. designations are Roaded Natural (about 10%), Semi- Primitive Motorized (about 40%), and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 50%).  Solitude Overall Rating Moderate Low Moderate Low Low Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) Relatively insignificant cultural resources are present. There are no potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. Special Feature Overall Rating Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Low Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. The IRA is 30,870 acres and very irregular in shape. Only the southern portion contains a larger continuous land area resulting in a configuration that is possibly manageable as wilderness. It has moderate ratings for untrammeled, natural, undeveloped, solitude, and special features. The IRA is 11,472 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has moderate ratings for natural, undeveloped, and special features plus a low ratings for untrammeled and solitude.  The IRA is 22,611 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for undeveloped and moderate ratings for untrammeled, natural, solitude, and special features.  The IRA is 9,261 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for undeveloped, moderate ratings for untrammeled, natural, and special features plus a low rating for solitude. The IRA is 12,152 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has low ratings for untrammeled, natural, solitude and for special features plus a moderate rating for undeveloped.  Manageability Overall Rating Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Low  Table 60. Existing IRA roadless characteristics Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Municipal source protection zones occur in Red Butte, Norton, and Monroe Canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. A municipal source protection zone occurs in Koosharem Canyon. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are public drinking water systems and sources in Norton and Monroe Canyons. Municipal source protection zones are in Red Butte, Norton, and Monroe Canyons. There are no developed drinking water systems. A municipal source protection zone is in Koosharem Canyon.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) - Spotted Bat (Euderma maculatum) - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl Sensitive species: Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. Sensitive species: Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: Arizona willow - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semiprimitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 90% of the IRA is in the Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized ROS class, with about 5% of the IRA in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 60% of the IRA is in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 40% of the IRA is in the Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized ROS class, with about 50% of the IRA in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 50% of the IRA is in the Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 90% of the IRA is in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. The desired scenic integrity is 90% high with 10% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 50% high and 50% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 75% high and 25% moderate The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 100% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 50% high and 50% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak IRA Little Creek IRA Marysvale Peak IRA Tibadore IRA Langdon IRA Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. Cultural resources are present; however, they are relatively insignificant lithic scatters. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. There are no known significant archeological sites. There are no known significant archeological sites. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding and hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various streams, wildlife, and meadows. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding, hunting, and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various streams, wildlife, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various streams, wildlife, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding.    Table 61. Existing draft UUA wilderness quality or attributes. The overall ratings are taken from the 2004 Fishlake National Forest draft Undeveloped Area Evaluation. Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Untrammeled - This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, mining, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern human activities include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Untrammeled Overall Rating Medium Medium Medium Medium Low Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire.  Modern effects on ecological systems include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire.  Natural Overall Rating High Medium High High Medium Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation; it is essentially without permanent improvements or modern human occupation. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, ditches, culinary and irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, partial cabin, old Monrovian campground, erosion control terracing, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, irrigation water development, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, fire and prescribed fire.  Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, dams, ditches, irrigation water developments, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, timber harvest, mining, erosion control terracing, cabins, fire and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, waterlines, mining, fences, troughs, ponds, fire, and prescribed fire. Modern human presence or occupation include: Roads, trails, waterlines, fences, troughs, ponds, fire and prescribed fire.  Undeveloped Overall Rating Medium Low Medium Medium Low Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, waterlines, range improvements, erosion control terracing, and an irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 6%), Semi- Primitive Motorized (about 4%), and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 90%). The southern portion contains a larger continuous land area that is Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized which could allow for solitude. Solitude is very limited due to a few motorized roads and trails, adjacent private developments, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 35%), and Semi-Primitive Motorized (about 65%). Solitude is very limited due to motorized trails, adjacent private developments, mining, range improvements, erosion control terracing, cabins, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 10%), Semi- Primitive Motorized (about 45%), and Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized (about 45%). Solitude is very limited due to mining, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations are Roaded Natural (about 40%), and Semi-Primitive Non-Motorized (about 60%). Solitude is very limited due to motorized roads and trails, waterlines, range improvements, and a very irregular shaped land area. The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations of Roaded Natural (about 5%), and Semi- Primitive Motorized (about 95%). Solitude Overall Rating Medium Medium Medium Low Low Wilderness Attributes Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. Bonneville Cutthroat trout in Manning Creek. There are no potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. There are no special features identified, nor are there any potential or existing research natural areas. Special Feature Overall Rating Low Low Medium Low Low Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. The UUA is 29,900 acres and very irregular in shape. Only the southern portion contains a larger continuous land area resulting in a configuration that is possibly manageable as wilderness. It has a high rating for natural; medium for untrammeled, undeveloped, and solitude; and low for special features. The UUA is 9,529 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has medium ratings for untrammeled, natural, and solitude; and low for undeveloped and special features.  The UUA is 27,168 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for natural; and medium ratings for untrammeled, undeveloped, solitude, and special features.  The UUA is 8,074 acres and very irregular in shape and would be difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a high rating for natural; moderate ratings for untrammeled, undeveloped; and low ratings for solitude and special features. The UUA is 18,183 acres and very irregular in shape and would be very difficult to manage as wilderness. It has a medium rating for natural; and low ratings for untrammeled, undeveloped, solitude and special features.  Manageability Overall Rating Medium Low Medium Medium Low     Table 62. Existing draft UUA roadless characteristics Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Municipal source protection zones occur in Red Butte, Norton, and Monroe Canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. A municipal source protection zone occurs in Koosharem Canyon.  Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Soils unsuitable for disturbance occur in the steep canyons. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are public drinking water systems, sources, and source protection zones in Norton, Red Butte, and Monroe Canyons. There are no developed drinking water systems. A municipal source protection zone is in Koosharem Canyon. There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. Sensitive species: - Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports Sensitive species: - Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports  Sensitive species: - Arizona willow - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports:  Sensitive species: - Arizona willow - Bonneville Cutthroat Trout - Boreal Toad - Northern Goshawk - Townsend’s Big-eared Bat - Spotted Bat - Three-toed woodpecker - Flammulated Owl See Specialist Reports  Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semiprimitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 90% of the UUA is in the Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized ROS class, with about 4% of the UUA in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 65% of the UUA is in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 45% of the UUA is in the Semi- Primitive Non- Motorized ROS class, with about 45% of the UUA in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class. There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 60% of the UUA is in the Semi-Primitive Motorized ROS class.  There are no opportunities for primitive recreation and there is none mapped as Primitive ROS. About 95% of the UUA is in the Semi- Primitive Motorized ROS class.  Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. The desired scenic integrity is 95% high with 5% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 50% high and 50% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 65% high and 35% moderate The character is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. Vegetation is pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 100% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. The desired scenic integrity is 40% high and 60% moderate. The character is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. Vegetation is mostly pinion, juniper, mountain shrubs, and grass with aspen and conifer in the upper canyons and elevations. Roadless Characteristic Signal Peak UUA Little Creek UUA Marysvale Peak UUA Tibadore UUA Langdon UUA Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. Cultural resources are present; however, they are relatively insignificant lithic scatters. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. Cultural resources exist; however, there are no major sites present. There are no known significant archeological sites. There are no known significant archeological sites. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding and hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various streams, wildlife, and meadows. Popular activities include hunting and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various water bodies, wildlife, trails, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hiking, horseback riding, hunting, and ATV riding. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various streams, wildlife, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting. There are no locally unique characteristics, but common to the area are many beautiful features that occur within and adjacent to the project area. Adjacent would include views of the surrounding valleys and mountain vistas. Within the project area, include various streams, wildlife, meadows, and rock outcrops. Popular activities include hunting, and ATV riding.    3.1.2 Alternatives 3.1.2.1 No Action Alternative (Alternative 1): The No Action Alternative Represents the existing condition described in the previous pages and in the EIS. This alternative would maintain the status quo and conditions on the ground would not measurably change in respect to wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics. Aspen restoration would not take place except by wildfires and natural succession. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Generally all existing activities would continue. Recreation activities including hunting, fishing, hiking, driving, and off-road vehicle use on designated routes, would continue, and are relatively non-impacting. Cattle grazing, with maintenance of associated range improvements such as fences and water developments, would occur. Dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. These activities are not anticipated to affect the existing wilderness quality or attributes and roadless characteristics.  The present qualities or attributes of wilderness; untrammeled, natural integrity, appearance, remoteness, solitude, special features, and manageability, as well as the characteristics of Inventoried Roadless Areas; soil, water, and air; sources of public drinking water; diversity of plant and animal communities; habitat for threatened, endangered, proposed, candidate, and sensitive species, and for those species dependent on large, undisturbed areas of land; primitive, semi-primitive, non-motorized, and semi-primitive motorized classes of recreation opportunities; reference landscapes; landscape character and scenic integrity; traditional cultural properties and sacred sites; and other locally identified unique characteristics, would remain affected primarily by natural processes. 3.1.2.2 Alternatives 2 through 5 Alternatives 2 through 5 within IRAs would include mechanical and prescribed fire activities to meet the purpose and need of aspen restoration. Mechanical (2 options) treatments would occur in the four action alternatives as well as prescribed fire. No new access roads, temporary roads, or road maintenance is required within the IRAs. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Trees would be cut as close to the ground as possible. Access for mechanical treatments would be cross-country by tracked vehicles.  The IRA analysis in Table 63 and Table 64 shows the total acres of each IRA. Next is shown the proposed acres within each alternative being treated by mechanical and prescribed fire, plus the percentage of the IRA being treated by mechanical and by prescribed fire, as well as the total percent of the combined treated acres. Note that 60 percent or less is actually being burned across the landscape. Therefore, the result of 60 percent being treated is the number shown in the Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (“60% Treated” column).  4% Table 63. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) analysis   Alt. 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) Total IRA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60%Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Langdon 12,152 0 42 0% 490 4% 223 2% 514 4% 6% Little Creek 11,472 0 327 3% 1,569 14% 17% 1,422 12% 1,088 10% 22% Marysvale Peak 22,611 0 217 1% 4,024 18% 19% 925 4% 4,008 18% 22% Signal Peak 30,870 0 862 3% 8,095 26% 29% 2,439 8% 7,631 25% 33% Tibadore 9,261 0 61 1% 1,201 13% 14% 122 1% 1,237 13% 15% All IRAs Combined 83,366 0 1,509 2% 15,379 18% 20% 5,131 6% 14,478 17% 23%   Table 64. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) analysis (Continued)   Alt. 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) Total IRA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Langdon 12,152 0 278 2% 514 4% 6% 317 3% 324 3% 6% Little Creek 11,472 0 2,142 19% 737 6% 25% 1,228 11% 1,028 9% 20%   Alt. 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) Total IRA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of IRA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of IRA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of IRA Being Treated Marysvale Peak 22,611 0 1,637 7% 3,747 17% 24% 1,517 7% 3,356 15% 22% Signal Peak 30,870 0 5,009 16% 6,396 21% 37% 3,478 11% 6,633 22% 33% Tibadore 9,261 0 196 2% 1,237 13% 15% 317 3% 1,047 11% 14% All IRAs Combined 83,366 0 9,262 11% 12,632 15% 26% 6,857 8% 12,388 14% 22%  Table 65. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 2 by vegetation type Alternative 2 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Seral Aspen 42 Langdon Total 42 Little Creek Seral Aspen 173 Spruce/fir 11 Stable Aspen 143 Little Creek Total 327 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 144 Spruce/fir 48 Stable Aspen 25 Marysvale Peak Total 217 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 304 Spruce/fir 359 Stable Aspen 197 Signal Peak Total 862 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 5 Seral Aspen 53 Stable Aspen 2 Tibadore Total 61 GRAND TOTAL 1,509 Alternative 2 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 352 Spruce/fir 11 Stable Aspen 1 Langdon Total 490 Little Creek Seral Aspen 951 Spruce/fir 22 Stable Aspen 596 Little Creek Total 1,569 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 371 Seral Aspen 2,096 Spruce/fir 451 Stable Aspen 1,106 Marysvale Peak Total 4,024 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,254 Seral Aspen 2,671 Spruce/fir 2,169 Stable Aspen 2,001 Signal Peak Total 8,095 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 198 Seral Aspen 880 Spruce/fir 63 Stable Aspen 60 Tibadore Total 1,201 GRAND TOTAL 15,379  Table 66. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 3 by vegetation type Alternative 3 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Seral Aspen 223 Langdon Total 223 Little Creek Seral Aspen 1,018 Spruce/fir 46 Stable Aspen 359 Little Creek Total 1,422 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 692 Spruce/fir 164 Stable Aspen 69 Marysvale Peak Total 925 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 913 Spruce/fir 1,202 Stable Aspen 323 Signal Peak Total 2,439 Tibadore Seral Aspen 103 Stable Aspen 18 Tibadore Total 122 GRAND TOTAL 5,131 Alternative 3 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 376 Spruce/fir 11 Stable Aspen 1 Langdon Total 514 Little Creek Seral Aspen 573 Spruce/fir 8 Stable Aspen 507 Little Creek Total 1,088 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 371 Seral Aspen 2,098 Spruce/fir 428 Stable Aspen 1,111 Marysvale Peak Total 4,008 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,254 Seral Aspen 2,477 Spruce/fir 1,888 Stable Aspen 2,012 Signal Peak Total 7,631 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 200 Seral Aspen 912 Spruce/fir 63 Stable Aspen 62 Tibadore Total 1,237 GRAND TOTAL 14,478  Table 67. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 4 by vegetation type Alternative 4 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Seral Aspen 278 Langdon Total 278 Little Creek Seral Aspen 1,448 Spruce/fir 62 Stable Aspen 632 Little Creek Total 2,142 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 1,086 Spruce/fir 425 Stable Aspen 125 Marysvale Peak Total 1,637 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 11 Seral Aspen 1,779 Spruce/fir 2,213 Stable Aspen 1,006 Signal Peak Total 5,009 Tibadore Seral Aspen 177 Stable Aspen 18 Tibadore Total 196 GRAND TOTAL 9,262 Alternative 4 – Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 376 Spruce/fir 11 Stable Aspen 1 Langdon Total 514 Little Creek Seral Aspen 380 Spruce/fir 8 Stable Aspen 349 Little Creek Total 737 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 371 Seral Aspen 1,978 Spruce/fir 314 Stable Aspen 1,084 Marysvale Peak Total 3,747 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,248 Seral Aspen 2,122 Spruce/fir 1,391 Stable Aspen 1,635 Signal Peak Total 6,396 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 200 Seral Aspen 912 Spruce/fir 63 Stable Aspen 62 Tibadore Total 1,237 GRAND TOTAL 12,632  Table 68. Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) acreage of mechanical and prescribed fire in alternative 5 by vegetation type Alternative 5 - Mechanical & Slash Burning IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Stable Aspen 2 Seral Aspen 315 Langdon Total 317 Little Creek Seral Aspen 809 Spruce/fir 35 Stable Aspen 384 Little Creek Total 1,228 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 847 Spruce/fir 340 Stable Aspen 331 Marysvale Peak Total 1,517 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 1,444 Spruce/fir 1,405 Stable Aspen 628 Signal Peak Total 3,478 Tibadore Seral Aspen 290 Stable Aspen 27 Tibadore Total 317 GRAND TOTAL 6,857 Alternative 5 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities IRA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mixed Conifer 126 Seral Aspen 187 Spruce/fir 11 Langdon Total 324 Little Creek Seral Aspen 569 Spruce/fir 8 Stable Aspen 451 Little Creek Total 1,028 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 372 Seral Aspen 1,736 Spruce/fir 320 Stable Aspen 928 Marysvale Peak Total 3,356 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,255 Seral Aspen 1,999 Spruce/fir 1,579 Stable Aspen 1,800 Signal Peak Total 6,633 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 200 Seral Aspen 738 Spruce/fir 63 Stable Aspen 46 Tibadore Total 1,047 GRAND TOTAL 12,388  Inventoried Roadless Area 3.1.3 Wilderness Quality or Attributes and Potential Effects by Alternative  Table 69. Langdon IRA - Effects to Wilderness Quality or Attributes for all Alternatives Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. 42 acres (0%) of mechanical and slash burning and 490 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to 223 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 514 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to 278 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 514 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to 317 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 324 acres (3%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to  Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes.  Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes.  Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes.  Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes.  Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation – This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunities for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little effect for 3 to 5 years.   Table 70. Langdon Inventoried Roadless Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives. Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species. See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land. See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems. Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semiprimitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Langdon IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.       Table 71. Little Creek Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation. Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance 327 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,569 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles 1,422 acres (12%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,088 acres (10%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles 2,142 acres (19%) of mechanical and slash burning and 737 acres (6%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles 1,228 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,028 acres (9%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles or occupation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization. would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little affect for 3 to 5 years.    Table 72. Little Creek Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effect to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Little Creek IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem. See specialist reports. Primitive and semiprimitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Table 73. Marysvale Peak Inventoried Roadless Area (IR) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.    0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these 217 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,024 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, 925 acres (4%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,008 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, 1,637 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 3,747 acres (17%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, 1,517 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 3,356 acres (15%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. wilderness attributes.     increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes.  increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes.  increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes.  Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA. Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.  Table 74. Marysvale Peak Inventoried Roadless Area - Effect to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem. See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semi-primitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Marysvale Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Table 75. Signal Peak Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation.    0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. 862 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 8,095 acres (26%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. 2,439 acres (8%) of mechanical and slash burning and 7,631 acres (25%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. 5,009 acres (16%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,396 acres (21%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. 3,478 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,633 acres (22%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA. Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.  Table 76. Signal Peak Inventoried Roadless Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. Municipal watersheds occur within the project area. No change would take place. Municipal watersheds do occur within the project area. Buffers would be in place to protect public drinking water systems. Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semiprimitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Signal Peak IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Table 77. Tibadore Inventoried Roadless Area (IRA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Tibadore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation.  0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 61 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,201 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 122 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,237 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes 196 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,237 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 317 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,046 acres (11%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Tibadore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.         Table 78. Tibadore Inventoried Roadless Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Tibadore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semiprimitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Tibadore IRA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the IRA.  Action alternatives 2 through 5 within draft UUAs would include mechanical (2 options) and prescribed fire activities to meet the purpose and need of aspen restoration. Mechanical treatments would occur in the four action alternatives as well as prescribed fire. Approximately 0.3 miles of temporary road would be constructed in alternative 4, and 1.3 miles of temporary road would be constructed in alternative 5 in the draft UUAs to access mechanical treatments. Temporary roads would be rehabilitated upon project completion. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Trees would be cut as close to the ground as possible. Access for mechanical treatments would be cross-country by tracked vehicles within draft UUAs, with the exception of temporary roads in alternatives 4 and 5.  Draft UUA Analysis Table 79 and Table 80 shows the total acres of each draft UUA. Next is shown the proposed acres within each alternative being treated by mechanical and prescribed fire, plus the percentage of the draft UUA being treated by mechanical and by prescribed fire as well as the total percent of the combined treated acres. Note that 60 percent or less actually being burned across the landscape. Therefore, the result of 60 percent being treated is the number shown in the Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (“60% Treated” column).  Table 79. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) analysis   Alt. 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3  Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area (UUA) Total Draft UUA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Langdon 18,183 0 79 0% 987 5% 5% 268 1% 1,033 6% 7% Little Creek 9,529 0 127 1% 1,220 13% 14% 685 7% 894 9% 16% Marysvale Peak 27,168 0 220 1% 4,977 18% 19% 1,016 4% 4,958 18% 22% Signal Peak 29,900 0 583 2% 6,318 21% 23% 1,536 5% 6,273 21% 26% Tibadore 8,074 0 42 1% 1,119 14% 15% 56 1% 1,143 14% 15% All IRAs Combined 92,854 0 1,051 1% 14,620 16% 17% 3,561 4% 14,301 15% 19%  Table 80. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) analysis (continued)   Alt. 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5  Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area (UUA) Total Draft UUA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Langdon 18,183 0 363 2% 1,033 6% 8% 513 3% 725 4% 7%   Alt. 1 Alternative 4 Alternative 5  Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Area (UUA) Total Draft UUA Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Acres Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of UUA Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Acres (60% Treated) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of UUA All Treatments Combined Percent of UUA Being Treated Little Creek 9,529 0 1,033 11% 685 7% 18% 669 7% 894 9% 16% Marysvale Peak 27,168 0 1,918 7% 4,623 17% 24% 1,621 6% 4,251 16% 22% Signal Peak 29,900 0 3,283 11% 5,504 18% 29% 2,426 8% 5,318 18% 26% Tibadore 8,074 0 56 1% 1,143 14% 15% 285 4% 972 12% 16% All IRAs Combined 92,854 0 6,654 7% 12,989 14% 21% 5,514 6% 12,161 13% 19%  Table 81. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 2 by vegetation type Alternative 2 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 2 Seral Aspen 77 Langdon Mountain Total 79 Little Creek Seral Aspen 70 Stable Aspen 57 Little Creek Total 127 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 144 Spruce/fir 53 Stable Aspen 23 Marysvale Peak Total 220 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 246 Spruce/fir 181 Stable Aspen 154 Signal Peak Total 583 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 5 Seral Aspen 37 Tibadore Total 42 GRAND TOTAL 1,051 Alternative 2 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 381 Seral Aspen 547 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 36 Langdon Mountain Total 987 Little Creek Seral Aspen 771 Spruce/fir 2 Stable Aspen 447 Little Creek Total 1,220 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 433 Seral Aspen 2,747 Spruce/fir 573 Stable Aspen 1,224 Marysvale Peak Total 4,977 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,273 Seral Aspen 2,571 Spruce/fir 913 Stable Aspen 1,561 Signal Peak Total 6,318 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 220 Seral Aspen 826 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 49 Tibadore Total 1,118 GRAND TOTAL 14,620  Table 82. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 3 by vegetation type Alternative 3 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Seral Aspen 268 Langdon Mountain Total 268 Little Creek Seral Aspen 554 Spruce/fir 2 Stable Aspen 128 Little Creek Total 685 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 749 Spruce/fir 187 Stable Aspen 79 Marysvale Peak Total 1,016 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 760 Spruce/fir 576 Stable Aspen 199 Signal Peak Total 1,536 Tibadore Seral Aspen 51 Stable Aspen 6 Tibadore Total 56 GRAND TOTAL 3,561 Alternative 3 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 382 Seral Aspen 592 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 36 Langdon Mountain Total 1,033 Little Creek Seral Aspen 489 Spruce/fir 1 Stable Aspen 404 Little Creek Total 894 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 433 Seral Aspen 2,748 Spruce/fir 549 Stable Aspen 1,228 Marysvale Peak Total 4,958 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,273 Seral Aspen 2,523 Spruce/fir 846 Stable Aspen 1,631 Signal Peak Total 6,273 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 222 Seral Aspen 849 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 49 Tibadore Total 1,143 GRAND TOTAL 14,301  Table 83. Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning and Prescribed fire in alternative 4 by vegetation type Alternative 4 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Seral Aspen 363 Langdon Mountain Total 363 Little Creek Seral Aspen 781 Spruce/fir 2 Stable Aspen 250 Little Creek Total 1,033 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 1,278 Spruce/fir 507 Stable Aspen 134 Marysvale Peak Total 1,918 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 11 Seral Aspen 1,644 Spruce/fir 984 Stable Aspen 643 Signal Peak Total 3,283 Tibadore Seral Aspen 51 Stable Aspen 6 Tibadore Total 56 GRAND TOTAL 6,654 Alternative 4 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 382 Seral Aspen 592 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 36 Langdon Mountain Total 1,033 Little Creek Seral Aspen 353 Spruce/fir 1 Stable Aspen 331 Little Creek Total 685 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 432 Seral Aspen 2,589 Spruce/fir 400 Stable Aspen 1,202 Marysvale Peak Total 4,623 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,267 Seral Aspen 2,178 Spruce/fir 663 Stable Aspen 1,396 Signal Peak Total 5,504 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 223 Seral Aspen 849 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 49 Tibadore Total 1,144 GRAND TOTAL 12,989     Table 84 Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) acreage of mechanical and slash burning, and prescribed fire in alternative 5 by vegetation type. Alternative 5 - Mechanical & Slash Burning Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Seral Aspen 474 Stable Aspen 39 Langdon Mountain Total 513 Little Creek Seral Aspen 539 Spruce/fir 2 Stable Aspen 128 Little Creek Total 669 Marysvale Peak Seral Aspen 933 Spruce/fir 407 Stable Aspen 281 Marysvale Peak Total 1,621 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1 Seral Aspen 1,252 Spruce/fir 596 Stable Aspen 577 Signal Peak Total 2,426 Tibadore Seral Aspen 279 Stable Aspen 7 Tibadore Total 285 GRAND TOTAL 5,514 Alternative 5 - Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Draft UUA Vegetation Acres Langdon Mountain Mixed Conifer 382 Seral Aspen 308 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 13 Langdon Mountain Total 725 Little Creek Seral Aspen 489 Spruce/fir 1 Stable Aspen 404 Little Creek Total 894 Marysvale Peak Mixed Conifer 433 Seral Aspen 2,336 Spruce/fir 406 Stable Aspen 1,076 Marysvale Peak Total 4,251 Signal Peak Mixed Conifer 1,273 Seral Aspen 1,979 Spruce/fir 702 Stable Aspen 1,364 Signal Peak Total 5,318 Tibadore Mixed Conifer 222 168 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,033 acres (6%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due Seral Aspen 682 Spruce/fir 23 Stable Aspen 45 Tibadore Total 972 GRAND TOTAL 12,161  Draft Unroaded/Undeveloped 3.1.4 Area Wilderness Characteristics and Potential Effects by Alternative Table 85. Langdon draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area - effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.   0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired 79 acres (0%) of mechanical and slash burning and 987 acres (5%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due 363 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,033 acres (6%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due 513 acres (3%) of mechanical and slash burning and 725 acres (4%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time; typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect on these wilderness attributes. to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have little effect these wilderness attributes. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation – This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunities for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little effect for 3 to 5 years.  Table 86. Langdon draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semiprimitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons, rock cliffs, and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little to no unique reference landscape potential. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. Project activities would avoid significant cultural/heritage resources; therefore, no direct, indirect, or cumulative effects because of implementing the action alternatives are expected to occur. No concerns were raised by local tribes. See Heritage Resources Report Langdon UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.  Table 87. Little Creek draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.   0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired 127 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,220 acres (13%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. 685 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 894 acres (9%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. 1,033 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 685 acres (7%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. 669 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 894 acres (9%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be a little affect for 3 to 5 years.  Table 88. Little Creek draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.    Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Little Creek UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semiprimitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential.  Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Table 89. Marysvale Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. 0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire will take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. 220 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,977 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,016 acres (4%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,958 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,918 acres (7%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,623 acres (17%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 1,621 acres (6%) of mechanical and slash burning and 4,251 acres (16%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.      Table 90. Marysvale Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. There are no developed drinking water systems.  Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem.  See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semiprimitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Marysvale Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.               Table 91. Signal Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.  0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and 583 acres (2%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,318 acres (21%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, 1,536 acres (5%) of mechanical and slash burning and 6,273 acres (21%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 3,283 acres (11%) of mechanical and slash burning and 5,504 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 2,426 acres (8%) of mechanical and slash burning and 5,318 acres (18%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. canopy closures in conifers would continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. typically 3 to five 5 for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. 5 years for vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change.   Special Features - (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.        Table 92. Signal Peak draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Sources of public drinking water - Identify any public drinking water systems or sources within the project area. Municipal watersheds occur within the project area. No change would take place. Municipal watersheds do occur within the project area. Buffers would be in place to protect public drinking water systems. Diversity of plant and animal communities - Discuss the diversity of plant and animal communities. Identify any unique plant and animal communities within the area. No change. The mechanical and prescribed burn treatments would create areas of early seral plant species that would increase plant size, age, and species diversity thereby improving animal diversity as well. Refer to the wildlife, aquatics, and botany specialist reports to see effects to plant and animal communities on the landscape scale. Habitat for TES and species dependent on large undisturbed areas of land - Identify any TES or sensitive species within the Roadless area. No change. Implementation of the mechanical and prescribed burn portions of the proposed action would be completed in a mosaic burn pattern creating a patchwork of burned and unburned areas. These areas would contain early seral plant species improving plant size, age, and species diversity important to maintaining a properly functioning ecosystem. See specialist reports. Primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation - Describe current recreation opportunities for primitive and semi-primitive classes of recreation within the Roadless area. No effect on semiprimitive classes of recreation. Mechanical treatments and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from semi-primitive classes of recreation. Subsequent vegetation regeneration would eliminate this in 3 to 5 years. Signal Peak UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and rock outcrops. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area the unique reference landscape potential is possible, yet not likely. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3 to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA.             Table 93. Tibadore draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to wilderness quality or attributes for all alternatives Tibadore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Untrammeled This quality monitors modern human activities that directly control or manipulate the components or processes of ecological systems; it is essentially unhindered and free from modern human control or manipulation.   0 acres of mechanical and prescribed fire would take place. Fuel loadings would continue to increase with a greater likelihood of large uncharacteristic fire and damage to private land. Conifer encroachment in aspen would continue and canopy closures in conifers would 42 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,119 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to5 years for 56 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,143 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to 56 acres (1%) of mechanical and slash burning and 1,143 acres (14%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to 285 acres (4%) of mechanical and slash burning and 972 acres (12%) of prescribed fire with mixed burn severities. Stumps would remain in the mechanically treated areas and fire would be noticeable after implementation and would fade over time, typically 3 to 5 years for vegetation to Natural - This quality monitors both intended and unintended effects of modern people on ecological systems; they are substantially free from the effects of modern civilization.  Undeveloped - This quality monitors the presence of structures, construction, habitations, and other evidence of modern human presence or occupation. continue to increase. Recreation activities, range administration, dam, water source, and waterline maintenance would continue. No action would not trend toward the desired condition, yet this would still have little effect on these wilderness attributes. vegetation to regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. regenerate. Firebreaks and control lines would be feathered to appear natural. Tracked vehicles would be used to accomplish mechanical treatments. Due to the relatively small percentage of the area being treated, increased regeneration and the methods being used; the proposed actions would have a minor short-term effect on these wilderness attributes. Tibadore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Outstanding opportunities for solitude or a primitive and unconfined type of recreation - This quality monitors conditions that affect the opportunity for people to experience solitude or primitive, unconfined recreation; including the values of inspiration and physical and mental challenge. Solitude would not be affected and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Solitude would only be affected during the implementation of the project and the Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) designations would not change. Special Features (Ecological, Geologic, Scientific, Educational, Scenic or Historical Values) No significant special features would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Manageability (as Wilderness) - A measure of the ability to manage an area to meet the size criteria (5,000 + acres), the resulting configuration of the potential wilderness, and the interaction of the other elements above. There would not be any change to the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The proposed actions of mechanical treatment and prescribed fire would not change the boundary, shape, size, location, or access. The above elements would only be affected for 3 to 5 years.        Table 94. Tibadore draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area (UUA) - Effects to roadless characteristics for all alternatives Tibadore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Soil, water and Air resources - Identify any unique or critical watershed or airshed resource and the habitats that depend on them. No impacts to threatened, endangered, sensitive, or MIS plant resources and animal species.  See specialist reports. Mechanical treatments would disturb soils and remove vegetation while prescribed fire would impart a charred appearance on the land.  See aquatic, wildlife, and botany specialist reports.  Actions will be consistent with the Clean Air Act. Reference landscapes for research study or interpretation - Describe the landscape that is present. Describe any unique reference landscapes that exist within the Roadless area. The landscape is steeply rolling with canyons and open areas. As evidenced through the developments surrounding and within the project area there is little unique reference landscape potential. Landscape character and integrity - Describe the current scenic quality and character of the area. Scenic values would not be changed. The areas treated through mechanical and prescribed burning would temporarily detract from scenic values of the area. Vegetation regeneration and growth would eliminate these effects in 3to 5 years. Traditional cultural properties and sacred sites - Identify generically any significant cultural resources within the Roadless area. No change. The mitigation measure of avoiding cultural resources would be employed during project implementation, which would prevent adverse effects to heritage resources eligible to the National Register of Historic Places, as described in the Heritage Resources Report. No concerns were raised by local tribes. Other locally unique characteristics - Identify any locally unique characteristics. No locally unique characteristics would be directly or indirectly affected because there are not any in the draft UUA. Tibadore UUA Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5  Cumulative Effects f 3.1.5 or All Alternatives Past, present and reasonable foreseeable actions on the Monroe Mountain were reviewed to determine the cumulative effects to IRAs and draft UUAs. (Refer to Table 53 through Table 58.) Impacts to IRAs and draft UUAs from their geographic location, human activities, and from forest management activities that exist on the ground contribute to the current moderate to low ratings for wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics. Reasonably foreseeable actions would not lower the wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics.  3.1.6 Desired Condition The desired condition for IRAs and draft UUAs is to “make practicable their preservation and use in an unimpaired condition” (Intermountain Region Planning Desk Guide; USFS 2004a). The action alternatives 2 through 5 would temporarily affect the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics. Over time, they would stay the same or even improve as aspen ecosystems are improved. 3.1.7 Conclusions The five IRAs located in the project area presently average low to moderate ratings for the six wilderness qualities or attributes. The southern portion of the Signal Peak IRA is the best area that seems to hold the potential for manageability as a wilderness area. Alternatives 2 through 5 would leave stumps mostly flush with the ground and a burned appearance. No roads would be constructed, no clear cuts, control lines would be feathered and reclaimed, sensitive areas would be avoided, and timing restrictions imposed, as proposed. The proposed actions would only temporarily reduce the qualities or attributes and characteristics until the vegetation grows and improves over a period of about 3 to 5 years. Therefore, alternatives 2 through 5 (both options 1 and 2) would take place without permanently lowering the wilderness qualities or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change.  Effects to the draft UUAs would be the same as for the IRAs with the exception of temporary roads in alternatives 4 and 5 being constructed. These roads would be reclaimed after use and would only temporarily reduce the wilderness qualities, or attributes and roadless characteristics; therefore, the existing wilderness eligibility would not change.  After this analysis was completed, an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory (NA and PFA) was found in the Indian Peak area which is within the Signal Peak IRA. Approximately 310 acres of the NA and PFA overlap this aspen project. If these 310 acres were not treated, the reduction of treatments in the Signal Peak IRA would not change the existing wilderness eligibility. In addition, these 310 acres are not located in the Signal Peak draft UUA.  Table 95. Mechanical treatment acres in Inventoried Roadless Areas (IRAs) and draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (UUAs) by alternative  Alternative 1 No Action Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Total IRA Only Acres 0 582 2,086 3,719 2,107 Total Draft UUA Only Acres 0 125 516 1,111 763 Total Overlap IRA and Draft UUA Acres 0 926 3,045 5,543 4,751 Total Combined IRA and Draft UUA Acres 0 1,633 5,647 10,373 7,621  The implementation of best management practices such as no new road construction in IRA and little road construction in draft UUA, reclaiming control lines, reclaiming the temporary roads in draft UUA, and cutting stumps mostly flush with the ground would manage the IRAs and draft UUAs in a way that would not permanently lower and may over time enhance the wilderness attributes and roadless characteristics from their present condition.  Compliance with 3.1.8 the LRMP and Other Regulatory Direction The Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (USFS 1986) does not provide desired conditions, goals, or standards and guidelines to specifically address or maintain roadless character.  As described in chapter 1 of the EIS, the desired conditions and the purpose and need for this project are consistent with the Forest’s goals, the objectives found in chapter IV of the LRMP, and the Utah Fire Amendment (USFS 2001). The District has also compared the action alternatives with the general direction and the standards and guidelines listed in the LRMP to determine compliance, and found that the action alternatives are compliant with the LRMP. This review, along with supporting rationale is found in the project record.  The District did a 2001 Roadless Area Conservation Rule (USFS 2014c; RACR) consistency review to determine compliance. The District determined this project complies with §294.13(b)(1)(i), (ii), and (2) of the 2001 Roadless Rule. The review and supporting rationale in found in the project record. The Intermountain Region also concurred that this project complies with the 2001 RACR. 3.2 Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may impact adjacent private property This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Fire Ecology/Fire/Fuels Specialist Report (Chappell et al. 2015; appendix I in this EIS). 3.2.1 Agency Level Direction Forest Service Manual 5100 (page 9) includes direction on Forest Service use of prescribed fire to meet land and resource management goals and objectives. The objectives of fire management on lands managed by the Forest Service are:  1. Forest Service fire management activities shall always put human life as the single, overriding priority. 2. Forest Service fire management activities should result in safe, cost-effective fire management programs that protect, maintain, and enhance National Forest System lands, adjacent lands, and lands protected by the Forest Service under cooperative agreement.  New: 5103.1 - Risk Management and Risk Reduction  1. Firefighter and public safety is the first priority in every fire management activity. The wildland fire management environment is complex and possesses inherent hazards that can---even with reasonable mitigation---result in harm. In recognition of this fact, we are committed to the aggressive management of risk.  5103.2 - Ecological 1. Identify and use fire ecology to frame land and resource management objectives. 2. Use Fire Management programs and activities to implement LRMP objectives. 3. Incorporate public health and environmental quality considerations into fire management programs and activities. 4. Manage the land to make it more resilient to disturbance, in accordance with management objectives. Again, new: Forest Service Manual 5140 (page 8) includes direction on USFS use of prescribed fire to meet land and resource management goals and objectives. 5140.2 - Objectives 1. Understand the role of fire on the landscape in order to integrate fire, as a critical natural process, into land and resource management plans, and develop achievable and sustainable LRMP objectives that provide for landscape that are resilient to fire related disturbances and climate change. 2. In cooperation with partners, strategically plan and implement on a landscape scale, riskinformed, and cost-effective hazardous fuel modification and vegetation management treatments (wildland fire (wildfire and prescribed), mechanical manipulation, biological, and chemical) to attain management objectives identified in Land and Resource Management Plans, to protect, sustain, and enhance resources and, where appropriate, emulate the ecological role of natural fire. 5142 - PRESCRIBED FIRE 5142.3 - Policy 1. When appropriate, use prescribed fire in a safe, carefully planned, and cost-effective manner to achieve desired conditions and attain management objectives identified in Land and Resource Management Plans (FSM 1920). 2. The NWCG Interagency Prescribed Fire Planning and Implementation Procedures Guide - PMS 484, is Forest Service policy (incorporated by reference at: http://www.nwcg.gov/pms/RxFire/rxfireguide.pdf) (FSM 5142, Page 8).  Methodology 3.2.2 for Analysis The method of analysis is primarily fire behavior modeling to predict the behavior of a fire in the project area for the vegetation conditions that would exist under the no action alternative and range of proposed action alternatives. Fire behavior model inputs were obtained from a combination of historical weather records and the weather prescription used during implementation of the Box Creek broadcast prescribed fire in late spring of 2012. Forest Vegetation Simulator outputs from stand exam data were used to inform fuel model and canopy characteristics choices.  The landscapes were developed utilizing Landfire 2010 vegetation cover. Fuel models were identified by a small group of fire specialists, then reviewed and approved by a fire-modelling expert at the Missoula Fire Lab. These fuel models are based on the current and expected posttreatment vegetation types. A side-by-side comparison of the modeling results shows how the alternatives would alter fire behavior. Below is a list of outputs that were evaluated.  • Flame length • Spotting distance • Crown/surface fire activity  For more information on how the fire models work, please see appendix FM in the Fire Ecology/Fire/Fuels Specialist Report (Chappell et al. 2014).  These models were developed to predict wildfire behavior for fire behavior analysts, often working on specific landscapes. We are pushing the models’ capabilities in attempting to determine post-treatment fire effects (Ager et al. 2011).  Since it can be difficult to demonstrate differences among alternatives using just a single fire behavior indicator, such as flame length or spotting, an index combining the flame length, spotting distance and crown/surface fire activity outputs was created. This index displays combined fire behavior differences among the no action and action alternatives proposed in this project.  The issue of fire affecting private lands necessitated a focus on fire behavior in and adjacent to the mechanical treatments beside the private lands, both after the mechanical treatments occur and once the project is completed. A distance filter from private land boundaries was applied to differentiate among the four action alternatives when compared to the no action alternative.  Specific burn parameters will be addressed at the burn plan level for project implementation. Each burn unit will have site-specific burn prescriptions developed to implement both the pile burning and the prescribed burning once the mechanical and pile burning is completed. These parameters include items such as fuel model, fuel loading and moisture, weather, organization and equipment needed, a communication plan, and a safety and medical plan to meet objectives (U.S. Department of the Interior et al. 2014). Each burn plan requires line officer approval to implement.   Timeframes a 3.2.3 nd Spatial Boundaries Treatment priorities are primarily based on the current distribution of wild browsers on Monroe Mountain. The first priority for mechanical and prescribed fire treatments would be in the southerly portion of the project area (area 1; Figure 22) where visually, current browse pressures on aspen appear to be less than the northerly and central portions of the project area. A secondary priority would be the northerly portion of the project (area 2; Figure 22). Browse pressures in the north appear to be higher than what is occurring in the south, but less than the central portion of the project area. Treatments in the central portion of the project area would be the third priority (area 3; Figure 22). By prioritizing the project in this order, browse pressure may be more directed away from newly treated areas; this is expected to increase the probability of recruiting aspen to reach 6 feet tall after treatment.  Mechanical treatments are proposed in areas adjacent to private lands, and within/adjacent to Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout habitat. These aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer areas would be the highest priority for treating as soon as possible within each area (areas 1, 2, and 3). Implementing these mechanical treatments first would help reduce the risk of impacts from prescribed fire to private property, Northern goshawk, boreal toad, and Bonneville cutthroat trout.  The issue of fire impacting private lands necessitated a focus on fire behavior in and adjacent to the mechanical treatments beside the private lands. A mile wide distance filter was applied to differentiate among the four action alternatives when compared to the no action alternative. A mile was selected as the majority of the embers created by prescribed fire in the modelling moved a mile or less before landing on available fuel. Lower flame lengths within a mile of private lands are less likely to create embers that could reach and ignite fires on the private lands. Lower flame lengths create a safer situation to ignite prescribed fires while also reducing the risks of embers starting a fire(s) on the private lands. Flame lengths drive the production of embers, and is thus important in determining the likelihood of an ember starting an unwanted ignition on private lands. 3.2.4 Environmental Indicators The environmental indicators listed below were selected by a sub-group of fire, fuels, and modeling specialists. These indicators were determined to be the critical indicators that are relevant for decision-making:  • Firefighter and public safety • Flame length • Spotting distance • Crown/surface fire activity  Firefighter and public safety are assessed through changes in fuels, and therefore fire behavior is shown in the fire modeling. Existing condition is modeled and then examined in the context of alternatives 1 through 5.  Flame lengths are one of the indicators of safety (Table 96):  Table 96. Fire suppression interpretations of lame length compared to safety (Andrews and Rothermel 1982). Flame Length (Feet) Interpretation <4 Fire can generally be attacked at the head or flanks by persons using hand tools. 4-8 Fires are too intense for direct attack on the head by persons using hand tools. Handline should hold the fire. 8-11 Fires may present serious control problems – torching out, crowning, and spotting. Control efforts at the fire head will probably be ineffective. >11 Crowning, spotting, and major fire runs are probable. Control efforts at head of fire are ineffective.  A fire behavior characteristics chart illustrates a primary characteristic of fire behavior: spread rate (Figure 54). The figure represents the character of a fire, which can range from a fast or slow spreading fire with low flame lengths, to a fast or slow spreading fire with high flame lengths. It helps communicate and interpret modeled or observed fire behavior. ‘Perhaps the single most valid characteristic of a fire’s general behavior and direct impact on above ground vegetation is ‘fire intensity.” Fireline intensity (Btu Figure 54 (Andrews and Rothermel, 1982). 30 per foot per second) is the amount of heat released per second by a foot-wide slice of the flaming combustion zone (Alexander 1982). This value has been directly related to flame length, an observable characteristic of fire behavior. Fireline intensity is indicative of the heat that would be experienced by a person working near the fire. Flame length and fireline intensity can be interpreted in terms of suppression capabilities as shown in 30 British thermal unit – The amount of energy needed to coor or hear one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit.  The curved lines on the fire behavior chart define the areas of interpretations shown in Table 96. The interpretations range from fires being easily controlled by hand crews, to fire on which equipment can be effective, to fires on which control effort at the head will be ineffective.  The surface fire characteristics chart includes curves for several flame length values as related to rate of spread and heat per unit area (Figure 54) with symbols for fire suppression interpretations ranging from fires that can be attacked by firefighters with hand tools to fires for which control efforts are ineffective (Andrews et al. 2011).   Figure 54. A fire behavior characteristics chart illustrates two primary characteristics of fire behavior - spread rate and intensity. Figures on the chart are an indication of fire suppression effectiveness related to flame length (Andrews et al. 2011).  Indicators listed above are primarily short-term indicators to address Issue 2; prescribed fire may affect private property.  The long-term indicator chosen to show the health of aspen ecosystem is Properly Functioning Condition (PFC), utilizing the Region 4 process shown in Appendix PFC of the Fire Ecology/Fire/Fuels Specialist Report (Chappell et al. 2014).  Properly Functioning Condition: Ecosystems at any temporal or spatial scale are in a properly functioning condition when they are dynamic and resilient to perturbations to structure, composition, and processes of their biological or physical components. The assessment utilized here was completed initially in 1998, as part of the then developed ‘Prescribed Natural Fire Plan’(USFS 1998), updated in 2000 in the Fishlake National LRMP Amendment (USFS 2000).  Indicators are fire return interval and acres disturbed by ecosystem cover type. 3.2.5 Affected Environment Monroe Mountain is currently vegetated with fire adapted and fire dependent species across much of its area. As one scans the landscape, it is evident that the vegetation evolved with fire as the aspen/conifer patterns show below (Figure 55). It is also apparent that fires have not functioned within their historic cycles for more than a century as evidenced by the large number of historic aspen stands now overtopped by conifers across the ecosystems. Low severity surface fires and stand replacing fires occurred at regular intervals historically, more than 250 years ago (Chappell et al. 1997; Heyerdahl et al. 2011). The fire occurrence database for the Monroe Mountain area shown in Table 97 and Figure 56 below is summarized from 1951 to 2013. Fire occurrence is displayed beginning at the top left chart. During the 62-year time span, 272 known ignitions occurred and burned 8,807 total acres of land. There is a range from 0 to 15 fires per year. The acreage per year was widely divergent, from none to over 2000. There were so few acres burned during many years from 1951 to 1977 that acreage did not register on this chart (acreage shown in blue hatch marks).    Figure 55. In this landscape view of Langdon Mountain, there is evidence of two historic fires, leaving two different stands of aspen of different ages and succession intervals. The large aspen stand on the left occurred from a fire in the 1990s and the stand to the right is an older fire that occurred in the 1840s and is being replaced by conifer. However, if one were to look under the aspen canopy of the 1890s fire, subalpine fir trees are there and have not exceeded the aspen canopy yet.  Only 2 years have had fires that burned more than 2,000 acres in over 60 years. Marysvale Peak, Annabella and Blackbird Mine fires burned in 2006, and the Box Creek Fire burned in 2012. More than 80 percent of the ignitions burned less than 0.25 acre each, as displayed in the lower left box as size class A. Only 4 ignitions burned more than 1,000 acres each, again in the lower left box as size class F. The lower central box displays that more than 80 percent of the ignitions in the last 62 years have been lit by lightning. Humans have ignited 17 percent of the reported fires and just over 10 percent were caused by debris burning. This is higher than the Fishlake Forest-wide average at 6.6 percent.  Largely due to a reduced occurrence of wildland fire primarily due to an increase in wildland fire suppression, and overbrowsing, most of the aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain presently do not meet the desired conditions described further in the document. Most of the aspen stands on Monroe Mountain do not have multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the communities. Big sagebrush in several areas is a major component, and fire regimes have not been adequate to perpetuate aspen in areas that are now seral to conifer. Sustainability of these diverse fire-adapted aspen ecosystems will largely depend on the successful reintroduction of appropriate disturbance processes, and reduction in overbrowsing of aspen. Currently, it is difficult for managers to allow fire to play a natural role in the ecosystem due to high stand densities, abundant fuel loading, the forest’s proximity to private property, and public and firefighter safety. The desire is for fire to be adequate to perpetuate and sustain aspen stands, an average of approximately every 20 to 60 years (Table 5)  Table 97. Fire size class and cause class rating categories for wildland fire Size Class Fire Size (acres) Cause Class Ignition Type A 0 - 0.25 1 Lightning B 0.25 - 10 2 Equipment C 10 - 99 3 Smoking D 100 - 299 4 Campfire E 300 - 999 5 Debris Burning F 1,000 - 4,999 6 Railroad G 5,000 + 7 Arson  8 Children 9 Miscellaneous Figure 56. The occurrence on Monroe Mountain for 1951 through 2013, cumulative effects area.  3.2.5.1 Existing Condition Mixed Conifer  Mixed conifer types occur across the Monroe Mountain project area at the higher elevations primarily on north facing slopes. These stands consist mainly of older age class Engelmann spruce or Douglas fir trees intermixed with aspen, white fir, subalpine fir, and mountain shrub. Fire return intervals in this type are typically in the 10 to 80 year range (USFS 1998). In those areas where Douglas fir and white fir are the dominant conifers, fire return intervals are estimated at 10 to 50 years. Where spruce and subalpine fir occurs, return intervals are believed to be 50 to 80 years (Jackson et al. 1998). In areas where spruce occurs without an aspen component, fire return intervals have been documented in the 50 to 300 year range (Bradley et al. 1992). There are few pure spruce stands within the analysis area. These areas have fairly high fuel loading in the 25 to 60 tons per acre range; (Fishlake 2010 Data Collection) leading the stands to a higher intensity, stand replacing fire regime condition. Many of these mixed Douglas fir and spruce stands in the project area are falling victim to insect and disease attacks, increasing the concentration of dead woody material and contributing to increased fire risk. Fuel loadings during historical times were probably no more than one-fourth to one-third of present day loadings, or 12 to 18 tons per acre (Dieterich 1983).  Aspen  The aspen within the Monroe Mountain project area historically dominated the higher elevations. Many of the areas that were once pure aspen stands have declined due to the effects of fire exclusion and browsing. Aspen is being overtaken by subalpine fir and Engelmann spruce throughout much of the analysis area. Many of these stands occur on the steep slopes. Fire return intervals in this fuel type have been estimated at 20 to 60 years (USFS 1998). These areas would have typically been categorized in a low to mixed severity fire regime depending on the amount of conifer present in the understory. Historically, typical fuel loads for these stand conditions were 3 to 10 tons per acre. Today, however, they are more likely to burn under a high severity regime due to the higher presence of conifer in both the understory and overstory. Today, fuel loading under these conditions range from 3 to 50 tons per acre (Fishlake 2010 Data Collection).  Current Fire Behavior and Safety  During the recent uncharacteristic wildfires, fire behavior was more extreme and faster moving than historically. Flame lengths of 50 feet to greater than 100 feet are common in the mixed conifer fuel types. The typical flame lengths in these fuel types make it extremely difficult for initial attack suppression resources to safely and successfully extinguish fire as shown in Figure 57 and Figure 58. It is common for wildfires in central Utah to grow to greater than 1,000 acres in a single day.  The bottom line is that initial attack, utilizing available engine and hand crews, is likely unsuccessful on hot, dry, windy, days in the heavy, continuous fuel. This makes working conditions unsafe for firefighters and often, the nearby public.  Most of the vegetation (fuels) across the Monroe Mountain project area has experienced fire exclusion for over 150 years, resulting in an atypically high fuel load. Had fires continued to burn as they did historically, a mosaic of fuel loads would be present. Now, the continuous fuel loading increases the risk of a fire easily spreading once it ignites, adding to the wildfire hazard and risk over a larger area.  Figure 57. Historic vegetation compared with existing vegetation and desired vegetation (Prescribed Natural Fire Plan 2000)  The 2007 Central Utah Regional Wildfire Protection Plan (Portage 2007) identified the Monroe Mountain Area (includes area from Monroe to Glenwood) as a regional priority project. The selection of these areas was based on the need for fuels reductions. The communities at risk in that project area are Monroe, Annabella, Monroe Meadows, Manning Meadows, the Koosharem Reservoir area, Long Flat, and Burrville. These are all state-identified communities at risk and reducing risk is a priority under the Healthy Forest Restoration Act (HFRA). There has been strong community interest in fuels reduction and creating defensible space. Sevier County has included the structures on Monroe Mountain as part of the completed Monroe Mountain/Cove Mountain Community Wildfire Protection Plan and begun some private land and structures defensible space work. This includes removal of surface fuels, limbing, and pruning trees and brush, and increasing canopy spacing between trees.  Community wildfire protection plans may also document possible practices in the event of wildfire including fire preparedness, evacuation procedures, and opportunities for fire education, mitigation, and prevention.  Topography and Weather  Fuels, weather, and topography describe the fire environment. They work together to define fire behavior. The fuels element of the fire environment is the only element of the fire behavior  Figure 58. Existing conditions and flame length on Monroe Mountain   triangle, which can be modified. Appropriate fuels modifications reduce potential fire behavior by changing the distribution, continuity, size, and shape of fuels, and fuel loading.  Topographic characteristics that influence fire behavior include slope, aspect, elevation, shape of the land, and the influence of topography on wind. Narrow canyons, box canyons, saddles, chimneys, and chutes all increase fire control problems when compared to other land formations. Topography and topographic shapes can influence wind patterns, convection patterns, and the susceptibility of vegetation outside of the fire to radiant heat from the fire. For example narrow canyons produce a chimney effect for the convection column, preheating fuels located within the “chimney”, narrow canyons can also allow for radiant heat to be transferred from one side (or aspect) of the canyon to the other, thus drying them out and making them easier to ignite.  Slope increases fire behavior by more easily allowing a fire to preheat fuels upslope of the fire and enabling spotting from rolling and aerial firebrands. Flame length and rate of spread increase with an increase in slope. Slopes within the Monroe Mountain project area are moderately steep, and range from less than 20 percent on uplands, 30 to 60 percent on east side of the range and 40 to 80 percent on the west side of the range.  Aspect is the direction a slope faces and, within the Monroe Mountain project area, all aspects are represented. South and southwest aspects typically experience the more severe fire behavior due to the duration of sun exposure and pre-dominant wind directions in this part of the country. Vegetation located on south or southwest aspects typically contain lighter and flashier fuels when compared to other aspects in the same or similar locations. Heavier fuel loads tend to be on the north aspects. Predominant winds within the project area are generally southwest, with local winds based on the topography.  Elevation affects fire behavior in several different ways including the amount of precipitation received, snow melt dates, fuel types and loadings, vegetation curing dates, the overall length of the fire season, and cooler temperatures in higher elevation resulting in shorter individual burn periods.  Summers are typically hot and dry with daytime temperature averaging approximately 85 degrees Fahrenheit with single or low double-digit relative humidity and poor overnight relative humidity recovery. The monsoonal pattern typically begins to set up in July, but is neither reliable nor predictable. Lightning caused fires occur primarily in July and August associated with the monsoonal pattern typical of the high desert. Often these thunderstorms produce dry lightning and strong winds with little to no moisture. 3.2.5.2 Desired Condition The desired condition as outlined in this document is specific to Monroe Mountain and was developed by the District; it is consistent with the Forest’s Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP; USFS 1986). The desired condition is to have persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate aspen communities, including siteappropriate, biodiverse understories. Big sagebrush, if present, would be a minor component of the aspen community. Fire regimes would be adequate to perpetuate aspen, particularly in areas seral to conifer. Table 2 describes the current and desired aspen stand structure for areas currently classified as seral aspen, spruce/fir, and mixed conifer.  Aspen sprouts are defined as aspen less than 6 feet in height, aspen saplings are defined as aspen 6 to 12 feet in height, and aspen recruits are defined as aspen greater than 12 feet in height. For seral aspen stands, the disparity between the existing and desired condition is great. The existing condition describes 592 sprouts per acre compared to 10,000 to 20,000 sprouts per acre as described in the desired condition. Similarly, the existing condition describes 119 saplings per acre while the desired condition describes approximately 1,000 to 2,000 saplings per acre. Lastly, the existing condition describes 276 recruits per acre, while the desired condition is 400 to 600 recruits per acre (Table 2). Similar results occur for aspen in the spruce/fir and mixed conifer dominated stands (Table 2). Accomplishing these 10,000 to 20,000, 1,000 to 2,000, and 400 to 600 sprouts, saplings, and recruits per acre would result in achieving the desired conditions described above of having persistent aspen communities with multi height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate aspen communities, including site-appropriate, biodiverse understories.  The existing vegetation distribution (Figure 6) shows approximately 20 percent of Monroe Mountain is dominated by spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen while approximately 10 percent is dominated by stable aspen. As shown in Figure 7, the desire is to have more areas dominated by stable aspen and fewer areas dominated by spruce/fir, mixed conifer, and seral aspen.  Environmental 3.2.6 Consequences Throughout this section, changes directly attributable to the action alternatives, such as thinning or prescribed fire, and direct effects are described. These include changes to canopy bulk density, canopy base height, consumption of surface fuel, etc. Changes to the potential behavior and effects of wildfires that result from the direct effects are considered indirect effects. 3.2.6.1 Alternative 1 - No Action Direct Effects  Under alternative 1, there would be no changes to current management. The treatment area would not move towards desired conditions in the mixed conifer/aspen ecosystems nor restore disturbance-based ecosystems. This alternative would not reduce the wildfire risk to human lives nor would it result in safe, cost-effective fire management that would protect, maintain, and enhance National Forest System lands, or adjacent lands as required by FSM 5100.  This alternative would not meet the purpose and need. Under this alternative, wildfire, when it occurs, could be detrimental to the ecosystems. It could burn public lands as well as adjacent private lands. Wildfire in untreated areas is usually more costly and less efficient to manage than either prescribed fire or wildfire that is managed in areas that have had restoration treatments.  It is likely that large, unmitigated wildfires would continue to occur as this area has had repeated lightning ignitions in the recent past and that lightning pattern is expected to continue. The area has a higher potential for human-caused ignitions as shown by historic data for Monroe Mountain and Fishlake National Forest.  Indirect Effects  Effects resulting from alternative 1 are indirect because there would be no management actions. The effects of implementing alternative 1 are discussed in the following order. In the short-term (less than 20 years), effects of alternative 1 would include an increased risk of undesirable fire behavior and effects. Wildfire behavior would threaten lives, resources, and infrastructure. This alternative would not move the area toward desired condition.  In the long-term (greater than 20 years) wildfires would likely continue at inopportune times and places while aspen continue to lose function as conifer continue to grow into those stands due to lack of disturbance. The fire return interval would continue to increase in these disturbancebased ecosystems. In addition to allowing surface fuels to buildup, this alternative would allow ladder fuels to grow up in areas on the edges of denser forested areas, and woody species continue to expand into aspen.  With no treatments or disturbance, it would be expected that the aspen would continue to decline. If wildfire burns though aspen, the larger stands could likely respond with prolific sprouting, as most of the larger recruits are top killed. Recent trends show that browsing pressure would probably prevent the sprouts from reaching maturity so, without some sort of protection or change to ungulate browsing, stands would be weakened as the roots use up carbohydrates trying to keep suckering. Stands that are already declining may be killed, or pushed closer to dying from ungulate browsing, particularly when combined with uncharacteristic fire effects at the wrong time of year. If they did respond by sprouting (likely), browsing of those sprouts would further weaken the stands, and some would disappear (Amacher 2001 and Kay 1993).  Cumulative Effects  Spatially, cumulative effects of projects were evaluated within the project area. The prevailing southwesterly winds typically drive fires to the northeast across Monroe Mountain, so fires igniting on the southwest side of the mountain have more potential to burn into the project area than fires further away or in other directions.  Cumulative effects include the effects of wildfire and vegetation management activities (mechanical treatments and prescribed fire) on fire behavior and fire effects. The period considered is about 20 years into the past and 10 years in the future at which time the majority of the actions proposed will have been completed.     Past Vegetation Management Projects  Past vegetation treatments and wildfires near, adjacent to, and within the project area have contributed to shaping the existing vegetation conditions for the treatment area with prescribed fire and/or mechanical treatments (Table 98, Table 99, and Table 100).  Table 98. Past, present, and reasonably foreseeable Brushsaw, Dixie Harrow, and Harvest treatments Past, Present and Reasonably Foreseeable Future Actions on Monroe Mountain Name Type of Action Year Acres Blue Peak Brushsaw 2003 766 Dukee Fuels Brushsaw 2004 617 Thompson Basin Brushsaw 2007 579 Total for last 20 years  1994-2013 1962     Box Creek Dixie Harrow 1995 29 Burnt Flat Dixie Harrow 1995 96 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 1995 440 Six Patch/Rock Springs Dixie Harrow 1995 109 Squaw Springs Dixie Harrow 1995 440 Bell Rock Dixie Harrow 1996 138 Bagley North Dixie Harrow 1997 47 Little Table Dixie Harrow 1997 126 Thurber Fork Dixie Harrow 1998 570 Burnt Flat Dixie Harrow 1998 316 Forshea Mountain Dixie Harrow 1999 65 085 Road Dixie Harrow 2000 22 Big Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 133 Blue Peak Dixie Harrow 2003 766 Box Creek Dixie Harrow 2003 104 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2003 14 Koosharem Dixie Harrow 2003 76 Six Patch Dixie Harrow 2003 265 Dry Creek Dixie Harrow 2004 93 Durkee Springs Dixie Harrow 2004 466 Hells Hole Dixie Harrow 2004 132 Indian Flat Dixie Harrow 2004 89 Rueben Burn Dixie Harrow 2004 155 Willis Spring Dixie Harrow 2005 176 Brindley Flat Dixie Harrow 2006 40 Wooten Spring Harvest 1989 103 Langdon Harvest 1991 151 Doe Flat Harvest 1992 28 Dry Lake Harvest 1993 46 Cove Mtn. Salvage 1 Harvest 1993 9 Buck Hollow Harvest 1994 24 Cove Mtn. Salvage II Harvest 1996 29 White Ledge Harvest 1997 36 Forshea Harvest 1998 111 Research Unit Harvest 1998 12 State Section 16 Harvest 1998 147 White Ledge B Harvest 1998 71 Monument Peak Salvage. Harvest 1998 60 Dry Creek –State Harvest 1999 151 Mill #8 Salvage Harvest 1999 10 Monument Peak Salvage II Harvest 1999 131 Mill #9 Salvage Harvest 2000 52 Mill Creek Harvest 2000 274 White Pine Harvest 2000 49 Annabella Harvest 2001 234 Mill #11 Harvest 2001 68 White Pine 2 Harvest 2002 61 Mill #10 Harvest 2003 162 Indian Peak Dixie Harrow 2006 95 Box Creek Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2008 156 Thurber Fork Retreat 1 Dixie Harrow 2009 461 Twin Peaks Dixie Harrow 2012 578 Totals for last 20 years  1994-2013 6,197     Indian Ranch Harvest 1969 47 Langdon Mountain Harvest 1969 17 Monroe Peak Harvest 1980 14 Pole Canyon Harvest 1982 19 Big Flat Aspen 4,5 &6 Harvest 1983 4 Lone Pine Harvest 1984 78 Lower Langdon Harvest 1984 82 South Monument Asp. Harvest 1987 17 Clover Flat Harvest 1989 186 Mill #11a Harvest 2003 68 Mill 12 Harvest 2004 62 Annabella Aspen II Harvest 2005 104 Annabella Aspen 3 Harvest 2005 22 North Clover Harvest 2011 191 Box Creek Phase 1 Harvest 2012 386 Box Creek Phase 2 Harvest 2013 284 Cove Mountain Harvest 2014 1,774 Monument Peak Harvest 2014 400 Harvest since 1969  1969-2013 5,774 Harvest last 20 years  1995-2014 4,949  Table 99. Past, present and reasonably foreseeable prescribed fires Prescribed Fire Name Year Acres Kingston Trough 1980 255 Bean Hill 1986 123 Deer Spring 1988 195 Tibadore Pond 1988 669 Deer Spring 1989 41 Buck Hollow 1989 18 Tuft Draw 1989 622 Forshea 1993 1,313 Tibadore Pond 1988 669 Kinney Spring 1996 794 Greenwich Creek 1996 83 Box Creek 1997 509 Little Table 1997 485 Shaffers 1997 334 Jackie Canyon 1997 267 Ruebens 2005 948 Thompson Basin 2008 163 Thompson Basin 2009 180 Box Creek 2012 650 Twin Peaks 2014 5,169 Monument Peak 2015 3,120 Box Creek 2015 2,658 Total for 34 years 1980-2013 19,265 Total for 20 years 1994-2013 4,847 Total in upcoming years 2014-2015 10,947 Acres Table 100. Past wildfires Wildfire Name Year Hell Hole 1975 896 Monroe Mtn. 1979 8 Monroe Mtn. 1979 67 Kingston Trough 1980 255 Burnt Flat 1983 359 Bean Hill 1986 123 Tibadore Pond 1989 387 Killian Spring 1990 407 Monroe Canyon 1996 196 Thompson Basin 1996 103 Flat 1997 5,505 Oldroyd 2000 1,329 Bald Knoll 2003 68 Marysvale Peak 2005 759 Annabella 2006 573 Blackbird Mine 2006 1,463 Box Creek 2012 1,520 Total for 20 years 1994-2013 11,516 Total for 39 years 1975-2013 14,018  The combined effects of the projects listed in Table 99 are limited to 4,847 acres treated with prescribed fire in the last 20 years. Wildfires had a slightly larger impact at 11,516 acres burned in the last 20 years (Table 100). An average of 432 acres per year burned over the 39 years of known fires. Very few wildfires were managed for multiple objectives beyond suppression due to the conditions while they were burning. Sixty percent of the last 20 years of burning treatments have occurred as wildfires.  Unavoidable Adverse Effects, Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitment of Resources  Without treatment, there would be expected more and larger fires of higher severity than occurred historically, or than are sustainable on the landscape. There is broad consensus that such fires will continue to burn in this area if no action is taken, though the specific extent and location of the negative effects could not be known until an incident occurs.  First order effects would include (but are not limited to): chemical and physical changes to soil; high levels of mortality across the burned area (assuming approximately 30 percent high severity); consumption and/or killing the seed banks; consumption of organic material in soil, including flora and fauna; and conversion of forested habitat to non-forested habitat through loss of the spruce/fir component.  Second order fire effects would include (but are not limited to) erosion, flooding, debris flows, destroyed infrastructure, changes in visitation to the forest and the economies of local businesses that depend on visitors, and degradation of water resources for wildlife and humans. Loss or damage to the Bonneville cutthroat watershed and boreal toad habitat would be more likely under this scenario.  With no treatments or disturbance, the aspen ecosystems would be expected to continue to decline rather than be sustained as functioning ecosystems. It is likely that more and possibly larger wildfires would occur, increasing the likelihood of private lands burning, private property damage and possible large areas of high severity fire impacts. The possibility of human injury or death also rises during these unusual wildfires.  Some of these effects would last just a few days or weeks (infrastructure would be rebuilt), some would take years to recover, some changes would be permanent. For instance, it is likely that where fires occur, continued overbrowsing on the post-fire sprouts would also occur, likely killing the aspen roots, resulting in loss of aspen ecosystems across the project area. Another example is that topsoil is critical to healthy surface vegetation and would take centuries to recover though, with climate change, it is unknown exactly what the ecological trajectory would be. The loss of old growth and old trees would require decades to centuries to recover. 3.2.6.2 Alternatives 2 through 5 Direct and Indirect Effects Common to All Proposed Prescribed Fire Treatments in All Action Alternatives  Fire is a natural process that the aspen/mixed conifer and aspen/spruce/fir ecosystems evolved with, as did many other vegetative systems on Monroe Mountain. Fires will continue to occur. Prescribed fires and fires managed for multiple objectives are likely to produce beneficial postfire effects in the fire-adapted ecosystems. Most fire effects cannot be created by a treatment other than fire. These effects include nutrient cycling, seed scarification (by both heat and smoke) promoting a vegetative mosaic of seedlings, suckers, shrubs, forbs and grasses, regulating available fuel loads, changes in soil moisture, etc. The many benefits of mechanical treatments coupled with prescribed fire include a controlled reduction in surface and canopy fuels which is especially needed in the project area near private lands. The effects of the action alternatives differ primarily in the magnitude of the treatments, which are disclosed in Table 44.  The risk of large, unmitigated wildfire would be reduced through all the action alternatives, although some treatments would better create safer work places for fire fighters and prescribed fire managers to work as the project progresses. The treatments assessed would not fireproof the project area; instead, they would reduce the amount of fuels near private lands, leading to reduced fire behavior. Reduced fire behavior (flame lengths below 4 feet, reduced spotting and less crown fire initiation) creates a safer place for wildland firefighters and prescribed fire crews to work in both the short and long-term.  Stable aspen stands are known to slow and/or stop a fire on the Forest during many fire seasons. On the adjacent Beaver District, there are more than 100,000 acres of mixed conifer and aspen ecosystems. A variety of treatments causing dominant aspen units occurred in this area including the Grindstone Flat clearcut and exclosure study in 1934, the Betenson Mill wildfire in 1958, and the Betenson Flat spruce harvest in 1972. These treatments gave rise to vigorous young stands of aspen.  All of these treatments were in the path of the Pole Creek wildfire that burned through the area in 1996 and scorched about 10,400 acres. The Pole Creek fire burned around these aspen stands that were about 20, 40, and 60 years old respectively. All were effective firebreaks during the 1996 wildfire. This is a landscape-scale example showing that young aspen stands can be effective firebreaks for at least 60 years, once established and recruitment has occurred (Campbell et al. 2004).  Options 1 and 2 Compared  Options 1 and 2 are not shown separately on maps and charts developed from this fire modeling as the models are too general to differentiate between them. The proposed option 1 and option 2 treatments differ in a number of ways that affect fire behavior.  Flame Lengths  Flame lengths outputs from the models used are not different enough to be useful in decisionmaking.  Spotting  Spotting would be extremely limited in option 1 in seral and stable aspen stands as only aspen are left, which rarely spot. Mixed conifer and spruce/fir under option 1 post-treatment would have a lower average stand height. This lower stand height would reduce spotting distance compared to option 2. Option 2 would not reduce spotting distance, as the stand height would remain the same.  Crown Fire  Opening the overstory up through cutting the stands to a 90 basal area, as in option 1, would have an impact on crown fire initiation. Small clumps of trees may still be able to torch, and a running crown fire would be unsustainable in a crown which had been partially cut out. This lowers the threat of crown fire affecting private lands and lowers the risk to firefighters working there. There are more trees per acre greater than 8 inch DBH in option 2 in IRA/draft UUA areas. This means that more continuous aerial fuel is available to carry a crown fire through it, if a crown fire hits it, than the discontinuous crown fuels created in option 1.  Option 2: Thinning a stand from below reduces primarily surface and some ladder fuels. The majority of the crown fuels, both conifer and aspen, remain as if untreated. When a crown fire moves into the thinned from below stands, it is possible that it could sustain itself across those stands and into the next, resulting in a fire crossing onto private lands. Until the prescribed burning is completed (in up to 10 years), crown fires could cross from forestlands to private lands. Once the prescribed fires were completed, the private lands would be at a lower risk.  On stable aspen sites, it is unusual to have enough ladder fuel to cause much torching and crown fires are unlikely due to aspen’s typical high fuel moisture. In fact, aspen is often used as a safety zone by firefighters as the typical vegetation has higher fuel moisture than surrounding vegetation communities. Aspen communities are also often used as firebreaks when burning surrounding vegetation (Hood and Miller, eds. 2007). Autumn leaf fall can carry a surface fire and frequent fires can maintain a grass-forb community, with aspen suckers confined to the shrub layer. Fire behavior is often so low that aerial ignition is recommended in the sparse fuels of an aspen forest to create enough preheating to move a fire across the fuels (Brown and Simmerman 1986).  Treatment Length  The effective lengths of the impacts from fuels treatment on fire behavior are different as well. Option 1, once fully treated, should last without maintenance for more than 20 years as the stands have been opened up and will take years to reach the pre-treatment density. Option 2, once fully treated, will begin to accumulate new fuels immediately from the untouched overstory, contributing to a shorter time between treatments.  Option 1 fuels treatment effects would last without maintenance up to 20 years, based conservatively on the Beaver District Pole Canyon fire effects. Crown fire initiation is a function of basal area, crown base height, and trees per acre. Indirect effects include a longer estimated retreatment time when compared with option 2.  Option 2 will likely need to be retreated in 10 years, leading to twice the treatment cost over the length of the project and into the future. Indirectly, the estimated retreatment time on option 2 would be at least double that of option 1, then it would likely need to be thinned again to keep it open enough to use as a shaded fuel break.  Immediately following treatments, surface flame lengths would be similar as leftover fuels in both treatments would be piled and burned. Over time, it is likely that option 2 will recruit dead and down fuels faster due to the denser overstory, standing trees dying and falling and dead branch wood. Option 1 is likely to result in lower overall fire behavior than option 2.  It is important to note that fire modeling was not capable of showing any differences between option 1 and option 2. The differences described above are based on the fire and fuels staff’s professional knowledge of fire behavior.  Figure 59. Flame length. Options 1 and 2 proposed treatment areas within 1 mile of private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented.  Flame Lengths  Flame length fire modeling results are shown after the mechanical treatments are done and piles are burned for each alternative proposed.  Figure 59 shows the flame length differences among the no action and action alternatives for options 1 and 2 within 1 mile of private land.  Under no action, 60 percent of the acreage can produce flame lengths of more than four feet. Remember that flame lengths greater than 4 feet are unsafe to have firefighter’s direct attack safely. Any of the action alternatives increase the number of acres that are considered safe to initially attack.  Compared to the no action alternative, which has 60 percent of the flame lengths above 4 feet, alternative 2 has 48 percent of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths above four feet, which is less than the 60 percent. Within the IRAs/draft UUAs, the majority of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths of more than 4 feet occurs 300 feet or more from private property. These narrow fuel buffer changes will have a direct effect on whether or not the subsequent prescribed fires are completed. Where slopes are steep and fuel mitigation is narrow, it is unlikely that prescribed fires will be lit in a timely manner to conclude the project in 10 years. Ignition windows are limited by current weather and fuel dryness, expected fire behavior and expected weather. There may be few days a year that a prescribed fire can be lit and conducted with success with the proposed fuel changes as ignition/holding barriers. The adjoining wildland fuels are likely to burn much more actively.  Alternative 3 shows 34 percent of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths above four feet. Within the IRAs/draft UUAs, the majority of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths of more than 4 feet occurs 0.5 mile or more from private property.  Alternative 4 shows 19 percent of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths above 4 feet. Within the IRAs/draft UUAs, the majority of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths of more than 4 feet occurs 1.3 miles or more from private property.  Alternative 5 shows 32 percent of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths above 4 feet. Within the IRAs/draft UUAs, the majority of the acreage exhibiting flame lengths of more than 4 feet occurs 1.3 miles or more from private property.  Summary: At this interim stage of the project, alternative 4 best reduces flame lengths compared to the no action alternative. This results in the most acres exhibiting flame lengths less than 4 feet, which creates a safer situation to ignite prescribed fires to complete the proposed actions with lower risk to private lands (Issue 2). The lower flame lengths lead to fewer embers lofted, which results in fewer spot fires. This also minimizes potential fire impacts to private lands better than the other alternatives.  The no action alternative leaves 53 percent of the area with flame lengths above 4 feet. After all treatments are completed, all action alternatives are an improvement over the no action alternative (Figure 60). In terms of flame lengths, alternatives 2 and 5 are similar post-treatment, leaving 10 percent and 9 percent respectively above 4-foot flame lengths. Alternative 3 causes 95 percent of the area to exhibit flame lengths below 4 feet. Alternative 4 performs best, causing 98 percent of treated area to exhibit flame lengths below 4 feet.  Spotting  Figure 61 shows the spotting distance differences between the no action and action alternatives.  Under the no action alternative, 59 percent of the acreage can produce spots. All of the action alternatives decrease the number of acres that can produce spots. Alternative 2 reduces overall spotting acres from 59 percent to 47 percent; alternative 3 reduces overall spotting to 34 percent compared to 59 percent (no action). Alternative 4 reduces overall spotting to 18 percent compared to 59 percent (no action). Alternative 5 reduces overall spotting to 32 percent compared to 59 percent (no action).  Figure 60. Flame length after all proposed treatments are completed.   Figure 61. Spotting distance. Options 1 and 2 proposed treatment areas within 1 mile of private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented.  Alternative 2 reduces 0.0 mile to 0.25 mile spotting from 47 percent to 37 percent compared to no action. Alternative 3 reduces 0.0 mile to 0.25 mile spotting from 47 percent to 26 percent compared to no action. Alternative 5 reduces 0.0 mile to 0.25 mile spotting from 47 percent to 14 percent compared to no action. Alternative 5 reduces 0.0 mile to 0.25 mile spotting from 47 percent to 25 percent compared to no action.  Alternative 2 reduces 0.25 mile to 0.5 mile spotting from 11 percent to 10 percent compared to no action. Alternative 3 reduces 0.25 mile to 0.5 mile spotting from 11 percent to 7 percent compared to no action. Alternative 4 reduces 0.25 mile to 0.5 mile spotting from 11 percent to 4 percent compared to no action. Alternative 5 reduces 0.25 mile to 0.5 mile spotting from 11 percent to 6 percent compared to no action.  A similar pattern in reduction of acreage, which can create spots, follows for further spotting distances. Alternative 4 is likely to produce the fewest acres that can produce embers that can cause spot fires, minimizing impact to private land the best.   Figure 62. Spotting capable of producing embers that could develop spot fires on private land. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented.  Figure 62 directly addresses Issue 2 – Prescribed fire activities may affect adjacent private property. It demonstrates that without action, 4,500 acres can produce embers that could cause spot fires on private land. That is, 100 percent of the spotting produced during a fire can reach private lands. Alternative 2 reduces that to 3,300 acres (72 percent); alternative 3 reduces it to 1,400 acres (33 percent). Alternative 5 reduces is to 1,500 (36 percent), similar in outcome to Alternative 3. Alternative 4 does the best job of reducing spotting that may reach private lands from fire, reducing the acreage to 500 (13 percent).  Figure 63. After all proposed treatments are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with the distance the embers could travel that could start spot fires.  Figure 63 shows that with no action, no spotting occurs from 49 percent of the area. Thirty eight percent of the area can produce embers up to 0.25 mile, 12 percent can produce embers 0.25 mile to 0.5 mile, and 1 percent can produce embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. All action alternatives greatly lessen the total spotting. Alternative 2 exhibits no spotting over 90 percent of the area, 8 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile, and 2 percent produces embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 3 exhibits no spotting over 95 percent of the area, 4 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and 1 percent produces embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 4 exhibits no spotting over 98 percent of the area, 1 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and 1 percent produces embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 5 exhibits no spotting over 91 percent of the area, 7 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and 2 percent produces embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 4 produces the best results for addressing Issue 2 with over 45,000 acres unlikely to produce any spots once all proposed treatments are completed.  Crown Fire  Crown fire and surface fire both reach private lands at high rates under the no action alternative. This is of interest as crown fire is indefensible utilizing ground firefighters. Surface fire may be defensible depending on the fire intensity and flame length. More surface fire equates to a higher defensibility in keeping fire off private lands.    Figure 64. Crown fire/surface fire within 1 mile of private land that could result from prescribed fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented.      Figure 64 shows the no action produces 60 percent crown fire and 40 percent surface fire. Each action alternative lowers the amount of crown fire. Alternative 2 shows 49 percent crown fire versus 60 percent crown fire under no action. Alternatives 3 and 5 show 35 percent and 33 percent respectively versus 60 percent crown fire under no action. Alternative 4 produces the best outcome with 19 percent crown fire versus 60 percent crown fire under the no action alternative and this is before the prescribed fire has been completed.  Figure 65 shows the no action alternative exhibits 53 percent crown fire. All action alternatives result in less crown fire than the no action alternative. Alternative 2 shows 10 percent crown fire versus 53 percent crown fire under no action. Alternatives 3 and 5 show 5 percent and 9 percent, respectively, versus 53 percent crown fire under no action. Alternative 4 produces the best outcome with 2 percent crown fire versus 53 percent crown fire under the no action alternative after all proposed treatments are completed.  Fire Activity Index  A Fire Activity Index was developed, combining flame length, spotting, and crown fire parameters summarized from the fire modeling to show an overall difference among alternatives. These data are summarized in Figure 66 and Figure 67. Alternative 4 best lowers the overall Fire Activity Index within a mile of private land at 81 percent low compared to 40 percent low under no action as in single indicators previously described. Alternative 4 also shows a lower amount of high fire activity at 15 percent compared to 50 percent under no action. Alternative 2 shows the following fire activity: 52 percent low, 8 percent moderate and 41 percent high, compared to no action with 40 percent low, 9 percent moderate, and 50 percent high. Alternative 3 shows the Figure 65. Crown fire/surface fire after all proposed treatments are completed. following fire activity: 66 percent low, 5 percent moderate and 29 percent high, compared to no action with 40 percent low, 9 percent moderate, and 50 percent high. Alternative 4 shows the following fire activity: 81 percent low, 4 percent moderate, and 15 percent high, compared to no action with 40 percent low, 9 percent moderate, and 50 percent high. Alternative 5 shows the following fire activity: 68 percent low, 5 percent moderate, and 27 percent high, compared to no action with 40 percent low, 9 percent moderate, and 50 percent high.    Once all treatments are completed, alternative 4 provides the lowest overall fire activity index at 98 percent low. One percent each remains in the high and moderate categories. The no action alternative leaves 45 percent of the area in high condition with 8 percent in moderate. Again, all action alternatives lower the fire activity index. Alternative 2 causes 90 percent of the area to move to low. Alternative 3 moves 95 percent of the area to low, more than double that of the no action. Alternative 5 also almost doubles the no action alternative at 91 percent low fire activity index. Figure 66. Fire Activity Index within 1 mile of private land that could result from prescribed fire. Mechanical and slash burning completed and prescribed fire not implemented. Figure 67. Summary of Alternatives 1-5. Fire activity index (compilation of flame lengths, spotting, and crown/surface fire) that could result after all proposed mechanical and slash burning (options 1 and 2) and prescribed fire are completed. Cumulative Effects  Assumptions  For purposes of this cumulative effects analysis, the State of Utah has a history of working with landowners on improving defensible space around cabins. Some defensible space treatments on private lands have already occurred. Defensible space treatments will likely continue into the future as Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands obtains cost sharing grant monies and as stewardship agreements with landowners are completed and implemented.  It is unknown where future private lands defensible space treatments will occur or at what scale or how much fuel will be removed. For purposes of this cumulative effects analysis, it is assumed that all private lands are treated similarly to what is being proposed for the action alternatives (i.e. conifer removal from aspen and basal area 90 in the mixed conifer and spruce/fir dominated stands).  The treatment areas for each of the action alternatives with the additional acreage from the Box Creek Fuels Reduction Project, Monument Peak Fuels Reduction Project, Cove Timber Sales, Marysvale Fire, private land treatments, and other past/present/reasonably foreseeable vegetation treatment projects/wildfires (Table 98, Table 99, and Table 100) in the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir dominated areas are included in this cumulative effects analysis.  Flame Lengths  All of the action alternatives lowered flame lengths across the treatment areas in the short-term. More acres exhibiting flame lengths less than 4 feet allow firefighters to use direct attack to limit fire spread. The existing condition in Figure 68 shows 51 percent with 0 to 4 foot flame lengths, about 8 percent with flame lengths between 4 and 11 feet, leaving 41 percent with 11 feet or higher flame lengths. All action alternatives more than doubled the acreage and percentage of the area with flame lengths below 4 feet: alternative 2 shows 92 percent, alternative 3 shows 95 percent alternative 4 shows 98 percent, and alternative 5 drops back down to 92 percent. Alternative 4 best lowers overall flame lengths across the cumulative effects area once all treatments are completed, thus increasing firefighters’ abilities to directly attack flames near private lands.  Over the long-term wildfires are likely to occur within the analysis areas. The size and severity of these fires will vary. Based on past wildfires within the analysis area, the results will be an improvement in diversity of plant species, vegetation structure and age classes for all vegetation types. Fuels will begin to increase over time as the stands re-establish.  Figure 68. Flame length after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Figure 69. After all, past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed, acres capable of producing embers, with distance the embers could travel that could develop spot fires.     Spotting  All of the action alternatives lowered ember production across the treatment areas in the shortterm. Figure 69 shows that with no action, no embers are created from 52 percent of the area, 36 percent of the area can produce embers up to 0.25 mile, 10 percent can produce embers 0.25 to 0.5 mile and less than 1 percent can produce embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. All action alternatives greatly lessen the total ember production. Alternative 2 exhibits no spotting over 92 percent of the area, 6 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and 2 percent can produces embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 3 exhibits no spotting over 95 percent of the area, 4 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and 1 percent can produce embers, which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 4 exhibits no spotting over 98 percent of the area, 2 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and less than 1 percent can produce embers which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 5 exhibits no spotting over 92 percent of the area, 6 percent can produce embers up to 0.25 mile and 2 percent can produce embers which can travel up to 1 mile. Alternative 4 produces the best results for addressing Issue 2 with over 65,000 acres unlikely to spot once all proposed treatments are completed.  Crown Fire  In Figure 70, the no action alternative exhibits 49 percent crown fire post-treatment across the cumulative effects area. All action alternatives result in less crown fire than the no action alternative. Alternative 2 shows 8 percent crown fire versus 49 percent crown fire under no action. Alternatives 3 and 5 show 5 percent and 8 percent, respectively, versus 49 percent crown fire under no action. Alternative 4 produces the best outcome for the issue addressed with 3 percent crown fire versus 49 percent crown fire under the no action alternative after all proposed treatments are completed.   Figure 70. Crown fire/surface fire after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed.  Fire Activity Index Once all treatments are completed, alternative 4 provides the lowest overall fire activity index at 97 percent low, as shown in Figure 71, 3 percent remains in the high and moderate categories. The no action alternative leaves 41 percent of the area in high condition with 7 percent in moderate. Again, all action alternatives lower the Fire Activity Index. Alternative 2 causes 92 percent of the area to move to low. Alternative 3 moves 95 percent of the area to low, more than double that of no action. Alternative 5 almost doubles the no action alternative at 92 percent low Fire Activity Index. Alternative 4 produces the best outcome with over 65,000 acres exhibiting a low Fire Activity Index.   Figure 71. Fire Activity Index after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed. 3.2.6.3 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Excessive utilization needs to be addressed before fire or other treatments are returned to the system (USFS 1995). If one goal of management is to restore aspen, then animal use needs to be monitored, evaluated, and adjusted. Otherwise, animals utilizing the aspen regeneration can slow or defeat restoration efforts (Bartos in Hood and Miller 2007).   3.2.7 Conclusions An increase in safety to firefighters and the public is expected from all action alternatives due to treated fuels exhibiting overall lower fire behavior. According to National Interagency Fire Center data, from 1990 to 2013, an average of 18 firefighters were killed annually in the line of duty. Seventeen firefighters have lost their lives while fighting fires in the state of Utah since 1961 (NIFC 2013).  Proactive fuels management has been shown to be effective in lowering risk to people and private property across the country, and that would be an expected outcome once all the treatments were complete. The largest increase in firefighter and human safety would result from alternative 4. The least risk to private property also results from alternative 4 as proposed. It treats the most acres both mechanically and with fire, reducing fuels and therefore lowering fire behavior across the treatment areas.  After this analysis was completed an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory was found near Indian Peak. Approximately 310 acres of the territory overlap this aspen project. If these 310 acres were not treated, there would be little impact to firefighter and public safety. The 310 acres are not close to private lands to have a negative effect if left untreated. 3.3 Issue 3 – Project activities may result in Northern goshawks being displaced This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Wildlife Specialist Report (Rasmussen 2015; appendix P in this EIS). 3.3.1 Methodology for Analysis The techniques and methodologies used in this analysis are considered the best available science. The analysis includes a summary of the credible scientific evidence, which is relevant to evaluating reasonably foreseeable impacts. The analysis also identifies methods used and references scientific sources relied on. The conclusions are based on the scientific analysis that shows a thorough review of relevant scientific information, and the acknowledgment of incomplete or unavailable information, scientific uncertainty, and risk.  A variety of methods have been used to search for and locate Northern goshawk territories on the District. Methods include Region 4 protocol goshawk surveys for proposed projects, aerial helicopter surveys in suitable habitat (winter months), monitoring existing territories annually, and reporting of nests randomly located by public or survey contractors for other projects. Known nest and alternate nests have been GPS recorded, and GIS mapped. Territorial boundaries were established by the District wildlife biologist working with the GIS shop. Boundaries are drawn according to aerial photomaps using best judgment of forested areas around the nest areas that may be used by goshawk adults and their young. These boundaries are in no way absolute, but are a good representation of suitable territorial habitat. As alternate nests and new territories are found the GIS database and District wildlife data base records are updated at the end of each field season. 3.3.2 Analysis Area The area analyzed for direct and indirect effects to goshawk includes the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir areas described in the range of alternatives (1 through 5) (Figure 1). The survey area includes the areas described in the range of alternatives (1 through 5). The project analysis area is the actual area proposed within the range of alternatives and is 67,750 acres (Figure 1 and Figure 6). The cumulative effects area for this project has been determined to be lands within the Monroe Mountain forest boundary (175,706 acres). Since wildlife respect no human imposed boundaries, private land, and any state lands will be included in the total acreage of the cumulative effects area. 3.3.3 Direct and Indirect Effects For a detailed description of the life history for Northern goshawk, refer to (Rodriguez 2008).  Prescribed fire, wildfire, and mechanical thinning activities that occur within Northern goshawk territories may create habitat disturbances that would likely cause abandonment if not carefully mitigated by following the habitat recommendations identified in the LRMP (USFS 1986) and other sources of best available science such as Graham et al. 1999. Implementation of these best science practices are part of the actions identified for this project. If activities occur within nest areas (NA) and post-fledgling family areas (PFAs), territory abandonment would likely occur if LRMP requirements were not followed. The displacement of adult and juvenile birds, if present, would likely result in mortality, and affect the viability of this species. The District has developed alternatives and project design criteria that would minimize the chance of Northern goshawks being displaced because of project activities (section 2.3). Some project activities may remove or degrade potential foraging habitat in the short-term (5 to 15 years). However, the quality and quantity of potential foraging habitat would likely increase in select areas as aspen recovers following project implementation. The amount of habitat potentially impacted by project activities varies by alternative, and depends on the alternative selected, weather related events, use of the area by ungulates, and other environmental factors. To understand which alternatives would impact the goshawk and its prey, more or less, it is important to discuss some of the key habitat requirements and guidelines that have been established by researchers.  Important to the architectural structure of a goshawk territory (including both the NA and PFA) is the combination of an older class of forest type vegetation (mixed conifer-aspen) including tall mature trees with interlocking crowns, large trees, large down woody debris, snags (mix of structural snags), water, understory vegetation, and openings. All these structural components are crucial to the existence and persistence of goshawk. Security habitat from predators (as the Great-horned owl (Bubo virginianus) known to prey on goshawk chicks and adults on the Forest) comes in the form of a balance of the above mentioned components maintained in an undisturbed fashion to protect goshawk young and adults. Nesting habitat structure with open conditions allows for the predation of goshawks, and especially their nestlings, by great horned owls (Boal and Mannan 1994; Moore and Henny 1983; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994). Nestling mortality may increase during periods of low food availability (Moore and Henny 1983; Rohner and Doyle 1992; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994; Zachel 1985). Nestling mortality may increase during periods of low food availability (Moore and Henny 1983; Rohner and Doyle 1992; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994; Zachel 1985).  Another crucial aspect of managing for the goshawk is management of vegetation for the bird and its prey. Reynolds et al. 1994 and Graham et al. 1999 both discuss the importance of managing a balance of habitat for the goshawk and its prey. Goshawks prefer to forage in closed canopy forests with moderate tree densities as compared to young open forests (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Goshawks take prey from small openings, although they usually hunt these areas from perches near the edge (Younk and Bechard 1994). Medium to large-sized birds (woodpeckers, robins, grouse, or jays) and mammals (ground and tree squirrels and hares) tend to dominate breeding season diets (Squires and Reynolds 1997).  In general, goshawks nest in mature to old forests with relatively large trees, high canopy closure (relative to surrounding areas), sparse ground cover, and open understories. Nests are often located near the bottom of moderately steep slopes, close to water, and often adjacent to a canopy break (Squires and Reynolds 1997). Important internal components of forests in Utah include snags, multiple canopies, and down woody debris (Reynolds et al. 1994).  The key comparison element for evaluating how the alternatives affect northern goshawk is the amount of nesting habitat affected (number of acres of aspen, or spruce/fir treated) and prey base affected (number of acres of foraging communities treated).  The underlying concern with a project of this scale is how treatments in goshawk territories would impact their continued use and return back to the territory post treatment. The Richfield Ranger District, and especially Monroe Mountain, has the largest concentration of goshawk territories known on the Fishlake National Forest. Of the goshawk territories currently known on the District, 22 are on Monroe Mountain, and 18 are within the direct and indirect effects area for this proposed project. As nests are monitored on the District, some are documented to have blown out of the tree and a nest no longer exists. A search is done for a replacement alternative nest and, if found, it is documented.  In a previous action on the Richfield Ranger District, in the Oldroyd-Monroe Meadows area on Monroe Mountain, a treatment within the PFA occurred. Implementation of the LRMP for goshawk management was implemented. These treatments were carefully evaluated prior to managing the area for hazardous fuels and it was determined that the risk of wildfire coming off the Fishlake National Forest to private lands was a substantial threat. Due to this threat, an experimental treatment was developed to try and reduce fuels and manage for the bird. Treatments were implemented to reduce fuels near private land and a cabin. Although Forest Plan Guidelines were implemented, abandonment occurred and the pair has not been back to the area for the past 2 years. Being able to determine the exact cause and effect is difficult; however, it is the judgment of the Forest and district biologists that it was a direct result of the vegetation treatments and not applying our best knowledge to about the needs of the bird. Managing for bird persistence in the same area as summer cabins and private lands is difficult. As a result, thinning and burning treatments for this project in the Monroe area is a crucial component to the viability of the Northern goshawk population on the Fishlake National Forest. It is strongly recommended to not allow any treatments in NAs on Monroe Mountain.  A thinning in a PFA may be designed to help prevent the spread of wildfire to private property while maintaining the integrity of the territory (Northern Goshawk Amendment, Guideline Z; USFS 2000).  In LRMP direction for the Northern goshawk, forest vegetation structural stage classes are discussed and how they relate to preference by goshawk for nesting, post-fledgling family areas, or rearing and teaching of young and foraging. Vegetation structural stage’s (VSS) range from 1 to 6 (with 1 being smallest and 6 being largest). The VSS classes found on Monroe Mountain average in the “3” range with more in the 2, 3, and 4 range and with fewer 5s and 6s on the top end. We find that VSS 5 and VSS 6 trees found on Monroe Mountain are low in numbers. With this VSS class in limited supply, so is nesting habitat for the goshawk. Therefore, care must be taken to retain the largest trees on the landscape. 3.3.3.1 Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action If the no action alternative were selected there would be no direct impacts on this species, and subsequently population numbers and viability of this species would remain intact.  Potential indirect effects may come due to natural succession events as the areas move from early to mid-seral species to late-seral communities. Portions of the analysis area would rotate from early to mid-seral to late seral, while other areas into early seral. If a large scale, high severity wildfire occurred this could impact habitat availability and effectiveness for the goshawk by reducing nesting and foraging habitat.  If no management were implemented, the area, through time, would remain susceptible to a wildfire event where lighting could cause a fire that may be difficult to manage, and impacts to key habitat components could occur. This could result in a wildfire that would be larger, without a mosaic pattern, the severity would be higher, and plant recovery and re-establishment would take longer. This type of large-scale uncharacteristic wildfire could be stand replacing, which could result in large patches of even-age regeneration across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. If large blocks of suitable habitat were burned, it would impact overall habitat effectiveness. If large blocks of regeneration and recruitment occurred, it could add to the diversity of the landscape depending upon the location, size, and configuration on the landscape. Wildfires on Monroe Mountain may not be detrimental to the goshawk and its prey. It would depend on the location of the fires and the proximity to nesting and PFA habitat. The uncertainty of wildfire in this landscape is difficult to predict, and therefore impacts to this species and its prey from fire is speculation. However, science tells us that fire will occur, but the size, severity and location is an uncertainty.  Implementation of the no action alternative would result in an undetermined amount of habitat effectiveness change in an undetermined area, and therefore is not recommended as active management for this species. 3.3.3.2 Effects of Alternatives 2 through 5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981 to 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In Alternative 2, 30 percent of spruce/fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 3, 37 percent of spruce/fir is proposed for treatment, in Alternative 4, 44 percent of spruce/fir is proposed for treatment, and in Alternative 5, 36 percent of spruce/fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area, 50 percent treatment is proposed in all action alternatives (2 through 5).  Mature goshawks are known to hunt an area approximately 5,000 acres per territory foraging in a wide variety of forested habitat. Seral and stable aspen are found within their hunting territory. In alternative 2, 39 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen in the proposed project, alternative 2 proposes 51 percent of stable aspen for treatment, in alternative 3, 56 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (percentage taken from spreadsheet Table 101) (comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type in the analysis area).  There are approximately 10,461 acres of PFA habitat within the proposed project area. There are approximately 2,817 acres of Nest Replacement Area acres in the proposed project area. Habitat for goshawks would be affected in all alternatives due to the combined size of the foraging areas (5,000 acres for each territory); however, an array of treatment options is proposed or not proposed within the different alternatives.  Goshawks are known to use a variety of habitats throughout their lifecycle. Removal of vegetation from a prescribed burn or mechanical thinning could have an indirect effect of decreasing foraging areas for an undetermined time until it regrows back into suitable foraging habitat to support prey species. This could take 5 to 15 years or it could be greater than 100 years depending upon the location of the treatment and the species that inhabit the area. Goshawks are known to prey on a variety of mammals and birds such as; rabbits, squirrels, chipmunks, flickers, grouse, and jays. Burning would decrease habitat and populations of some prey species (especially small mammals) as woody debris is burned and increase populations of others (such as jays or woodpeckers) as snags are created. The larger mammals are more advantageous for them to forage upon as they provide more energy for the effort. As stated above, it is difficult to determine how long suitable vegetation will take to regrow and provide habitat for prey. This can further be complicated as the area is managed for other resources such  Table 101. Vegetation affected by alternatives, percentage and acres treated compared to the analysis area Compare CEA to Forested Type Mechanical & Associated Slash Burning and Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Total CEA acres % of CEA proposed Mixed Conifer----Alt. 2 2,607 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 12,241 31,129 39.3 Stable Aspen 8,820 17,009 51.9 Spruce/fir 4,313 14,392 30.0 TOTAL 27,981 67,750 41.3 Mixed Conifer---Alt. 3 2,605 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 15,013 31,129 48.2 Stable Aspen 9,497 17,009 55.8 Spruce/fir 5,348 14,392 37.2 TOTAL 32,461 67,750 47.9 Mixed Conifer---Alt. 4 2,609 5,220 50.0 Seral Aspen 17,150 31,129 55.1 Stable Aspen 10,146 17,009 59.7 Spruce/fir 6,394 14,392 44.4 TOTAL 36,300 67,750 53.6 Mixed Conifer---Alt.5 2,605 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 13,742 31,129 44.1 Stable Aspen 9,406 17,009 55.3 Spruce/fir 5,191 14,392 36.1 TOTAL 30,944 67,750 45.7  as domestic and wild ungulates. Ungulates can slow or suppress suitable habitat for prey species, as well as weather events and storm patterns.  Goshawks can breed successfully in forests where timber harvesting has occurred (Reynolds et al. 1994; Woodbridge and Detrich 1994), but they appear to prefer stands of mature and overmature trees for nesting and foraging (Bright-Smith and Mannan 1994). In addition, occupancy of the nest stand has been positively associated with patch size (Woodbridge and Detrich 1994). However, the effects of reducing the number and size of mature trees on existing goshawk densities or productivity are unknown. Population models for species in fragmented forest landscapes suggest that sharp declines in viability can occur if habitat decreases over the longterm (Franklin and Forman 1987; Lamberson et al. 1992). The removal of suitable nesting habitat through timber harvesting or other management activities can be a threat to the goshawk (McCarthy et al. 1989).  Alternative 2 presents the least impacts to goshawk territories as it proposes no treatments in the NAs or PFAs of any goshawk territory (see Table 102 and Table 103 below). This alternative allows for treatments within the foraging area that will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and opens areas up for foraging by the goshawk. This alternative also allows for management of down woody debris, and snag retention, which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. No impacts to viability because of alternative 2 are expected.  Alternative 3 proposes no treatments in the NAs and treatments in the PFA that range from 14 to 61 percent (two territories range in the single digit range because they are on the edge of proposed treatment areas). This alternative will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and open areas up for foraging by the goshawk. While it allows for treatments within the foraging areas similar to alternative 2, it also allows treatments within 18 PFAs, which will create open areas and make fledglings and adults vulnerable to predators. Opening up the PFAs would impact the persistence of these territories, and impact the overall viability of the population. Management of down woody debris, and snag retention, is also included, which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. Impacts from alternative 3 may affect the viability of the species.  Alternative 4 proposes treatments in the NAs that range from approximately 60 to 98 percent and treatments in PFAs that range from 35 to 90 percent (two territories range in the single digit range because they are on the edge of proposed treatment areas). This alternative will open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and open areas up for foraging by the goshawk. While it allows for treatments within the foraging areas similar to alternative 2, it also allows treatments within NAs and PFAs, which would create open areas making nesting adults and Juveniles and also making fledglings and adults vulnerable to predators in the PFAs. Opening up the NAs and PFAs would impact the persistence of these territories, and impact the overall viability of the population. Management of down woody debris, and snag retention, is also included, which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management. Impacts from alternative 4 may affect the viability of the species.  Alternative 5 proposes no treatments in the NAs and light treatments in two PFAs that range from 30 to 34 percent in two territories. This alternative would open small areas up to enhance habitat for prey and open areas up for foraging by the goshawk. While it allows for treatments within the foraging areas similar to alternative 2, it also allows treatments within two PFAs, which would create open areas and make fledglings and adults vulnerable to predators. Opening up the two PFAs (30 to 34 percent) would impact the persistence of these territories, and impact the overall viability of the population. Management of down woody debris, and snag retention, is also included, which is crucial to the goshawk and prey management.  Past treatments within PFAs have not only caused abandonment on the Fishlake but also on the Dixie National Forest to the South (Rodriguez 2014, personal conversation). Based on Fishlake data and observations from other goshawks biologists, not treating in the NAs for this project is important to the viability of the goshawk on Monroe Mountain and on the Fishlake National Forest. Treating within PFAs is generally not recommended in order to keep disturbance to a minimum. Table 102 and Table 103 display the correlation between territories and treatment type by alternative. Table 102. Percent of Nest Replacement Areas (NAs) affected by each alternative   Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 NAs Approximate NA Acres Mechanical and Prescribed Fire Prescribed Fire w/Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Percent NA Treated Mechanical and Prescribed Fire Prescribed Fire w/Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Percent NA Treated Mechanical and Prescribed Fire Prescribed Fire w/Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Percent NA Treated Big Table North 181 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Big Table South 183 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Brindley Flat 201 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Cove Nest 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Deer Spring 601 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Doe Hole 177 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Eagle Flat 196 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Hunters Flat 192 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Langdon East 180 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Langdon West 180 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Magleby 222 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Manning Creek 213 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Nielsen Canyon 202 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% North Big Lake 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Oldroyd 682 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Paxton 166 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Sherwood Forest 156 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Indian Ranch 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Grand Total 3,732 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%  Alternative 4 Alternative 5     Big Table North 181 178 0 178 98.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Big Table South 183 147 0 147 80.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Brindley Flat 201 119 0 119 59.2% 0 0 0 0.0%     Cove Nest 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Deer Spring 601 56 0 56 9.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Doe Hole 177 154 0 154 87.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Eagle Flat 196 178 0 178 90.8% 0 0 0 0.0%     Hunters Flat 192 188 0 188 97.9% 0 0 0 0.0%     Langdon East 180 152 0 152 84.4% 0 0 0 0.0%     Langdon West 180 125 0 125 69.4% 0 0 0 0.0%     Magleby 222 170 0 170 76.6% 0 0 0 0.0%     Manning Creek 213 169 0 169 79.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Nielsen Canyon 202 119 0 119 58.9% 0 0 0 0.0%     North Big Lake 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Oldroyd 682 9 0 9 1.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Paxton 166 118 0 118 71.1% 0 0 0 0.0%     Sherwood Forest 156 121 0 121 77.6% 0 0 0 0.0%     Indian Ranch 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Grand Total 3,732 0 0 2,003 53.7% 0 0 0 0.0%      Table 103. Percent of Post-Fledgling Areas affected by each alternative   Alternative 1 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 PFAs Approximate PFA Acres Mechanical and Prescribed Fire Prescribed Fire w/Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Percent PFA Treated Mechanical and Prescribed Fire Prescribed Fire w/Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Percent PFA Treated Mechanical and Prescribed Fire Prescribed Fire w/Mixed Burn Severity Grand Total Percent PFA Treated Big Table North 619 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 348 0 348 56.2% Big Table South 566 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 287 0 287 50.7% Brindley Flat 617 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 163 0 163 26.4% Cove Nest 600 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 263 0 263 43.8% Deer Spring 601 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 56 0 56 9.3% Doe Hole 601 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 113 0 113 18.8% Eagle Flat 618 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 378 0 378 61.2% Hunters Flat 612 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 327 0 327 53.4% Langdon East 593 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 294 0 294 49.6% Langdon West 598 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 236 0 236 39.5% Magleby 596 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 279 0 279 46.8% Manning Creek 772 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 329 0 329 42.6% Nielsen Canyon 616 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 184 0 184 29.9% North Big Lake 589 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 278 0 278 47.2% Oldroyd 682 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 9 0 9 1.3% Paxton 580 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 196 0 196 33.8% Sherwood Forest 601 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 88 0 88 14.6% Indian Ranch 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% Grand Total 10,461 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0% 3828 0 3828 36.6%  Alternative 4 Alternative 5     Big Table North 619 526 0 526 85.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Big Table South 566 434 0 434 76.7% 0 0 0 0.0%     Brindley Flat 617 282 0 282 45.7% 0 0 0 0.0%     Cove Nest 600 430 0 430 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Manning Creek 772 498 0 498 64.5% 0 0 0 0.0%     Nielsen Canyon 616 302 0 302 49.0% 184 0 184 29.9%     North Big Lake 589 445 0 445 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Oldroyd 682 9 0 9 1.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Paxton 580 314 0 314 54.1% 0 0 0 0.0%     Sherwood Forest 601 210 0 210 34.9% 196 0 196 32.6%     Indian Ranch 0 0 0 0 0.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Grand Total 10,461 6,101 0 6,101 58.3% 380 0 380 3.6%     Deer Spring 601 56 0 56 9.3% 0 0 0 0.0%     Doe Hole 601 267 0 267 44.4% 0 0 0 0.0%     Eagle Flat 618 556 0 556 90.0% 0 0 0 0.0%     Hunters Flat 612 515 0 515 84.2% 0 0 0 0.0%     Langdon East 593 446 0 446 75.2% 0 0 0 0.0%     Langdon West 598 361 0 361 60.4% 0 0 0 0.0%     Magleby 596 450 0 450 75.5% 0 0 0 0.0%      Surveys conducted in 2014 revealed two new goshawk nests with associated NAs and PFAs; however, only one of the territories occurs within the boundaries of this project. This new territory will be referred to as the “Indian Ranch Territory”. Approximately 310 acres of this territory occurs within the boundaries of this project. The nest was active in 2014 and successful in producing two fledglings. These 310 acres make up less than 1 percent of the project area. The majority of the 310 acres occur in stable aspen. To maintain habitat requirements and population viability, the Forest wildlife biologist recommends that no treatments occur in these 310 acres. These 310 acres could become part of the 40 percent non-treatment mosaic pattern that is required to remain to meet goshawk foraging guidelines. These 310 acres are discussed further in the Wildlife Specialist Report (Rasmussen 2015; appendix P in this EIS).  The following measures will be implemented on the Monroe Mountain project to ensure proper management is occurring and viability considered and met.  “Monitoring requirements” are found in Appendix CC of the goshawk amendment for the six forests in Utah (USFS 2000) and discuss the following process:  • ID m-1--Question: Are known goshawk territories on national forests remaining occupied? o Item to Measure: Goshawk territory occupancy at the forest level. o Acceptable Range: Less than 20 percent decline in territory occupancy over a 3- year period. o Measurement Frequency: Annually (report every 3 years)  • ID m-2—Question: Are mitigation measures (standards and guidelines) employed during vegetative management project implementation sufficient to prevent territory abandonment? o Item to Measure: Goshawk territory occupancy following vegetative management treatments. o Acceptable Range: No territory abandonment on projects where mitigation measures are used. o Measurement Frequency: The first full breeding period following activity in all projects where pre-project surveys determined territory occupancy (report annually).  • ID m-3—Question: is habitat connectivity as represented by structural and species diversity and dispersion thereof, within and among 5th and 6th order watersheds (or equivalent ecological scale) being maintained? o Item to Measure: Spatial dispersion patch size of mature and old forest groups within a 5th to 6th order watershed. Tree species composition mix within mature and old groups within a landscape. o Acceptable Range: Approximately 40 percent of the coniferous and 30 percent of the aspen-forested acres within a landscape are in VSS 5 and 6 classes. Seral species characteristic of the cover type are well represented VSS 5 and 6 classes. o Measurement Frequency: Completion of each landscape assessment (report every 5 years).  Other sections of the monitoring matrix speak of monitoring long-term for down woody material and snags. 3.3.4 Cumulative Effects Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to goshawk in different ways. We have seen an increase in off-road traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing, and private land development on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, and natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen and mixed conifer on the mountain. All these types of disturbances can affect goshawk occupancy within their territory to some degree. As we move into the future for goshawk habitat management it is important to keep in mind Monroe Mountain currently provides prime habitat to foster the life cycle components needed to sustain a healthy population. The mountain has more goshawk territories per square mile than any other district on the Fishlake National Forest. A delicate balance is needed to provide current territorial features while planning for key habitat components in the future.  Section 5 of Rasmussen 2015 (appendix P in this EIS) describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  3.3.5 Conclusion Maintaining adequate structural components within the NAs and PFAs of goshawk territories to ensure habitat effectiveness which encompasses the entire portion of their life cycle when they are on the forest is crucial to maintain viability. It is also important to follow recommendations in foraging habitat to manage for prey species habitat. These structural components referred to in the goshawk amendment will help maintain a prey base for the adults to utilize during mating and rearing season as well as for the fledglings when they are old enough to hunt for themselves within the territory. Alternatives 3, 4 and 5 do not allow enough of the habitat requirements to maintain this need. Alternative 2 would allow enough habitat requirements to be maintained. Alternatives 3, 4, and 5 may cause territory abandonment across the Monroe landscape. This abandonment may result in dispersion from Monroe Mountain to other mountain ranges or make abandonment may result in dispersion from Monroe Mountain to other mountain ranges or make the birds susceptible to predation. We then would move further away from our Forest Plan goal of a viable population across the forest. 3.4 Issue 4 – Project activities may result in Bonneville cutthroat trout and Boreal toad habitat near Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake being severely degraded This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Aquatic Specialist Report for Sensitive and MIS Aquatic Species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project (Whelan 2015; appendix F in this EIS). 3.4.1 Affected Environment This section discusses the environment that would be affected, specifically as it relates to aquatic biota. The Forest Service Manual states that wildlife [and fisheries] habitat should be maintained to provide for viable populations of existing and approved introduced wildlife [and fish] species.  The project area contains a variety of habitat types including aspen, mixed conifer with remnant aspen, high elevation conifer stands, mountain sagebrush, mountain brush, herbaceous forbs and grasses, and streams and lakes with associated riparian habitats. Riparian areas may contain conifers, aspen, cottonwoods, willows, and birch along with a variety of lower shrubs, grasses, sedges, rushes, and forbs. On low to mid-elevation slopes, pinyon-juniper, and low sagebrush are common.  The project area encompasses elevations between about 5,600 feet at the lower elevation foothill slope breaks along the Forest boundary to over 11,200 feet on some of the peaks. The majority of the project is sited on the relatively gentle slopes of the plateau top of Monroe Mountain, but some components are on steeper slopes of all aspects, especially on some of the west facing drainages in Monroe Creek south to Dry Creek.  The different vegetative communities within the project area provides habitat for a variety of wildlife species. The project area supports mule deer, elk, coyote, bobcat, cougar, rabbits, squirrel, wild turkey, various raptor species, and small rodents. Fish species include native Bonneville cutthroat trout (BVCT), non-native trout, sterile hybrid trout, and non-game fish. These terrestrial and aquatic wildlife species contribute to ecosystem function in a wide array of habitats and settings. The many lakes, reservoirs, and streams support an active sport fishery. Manning Meadow Reservoir supports a critical BVCT broodstock operation that is important in restoring new conservation populations as well as providing the only pure BVCT lake fishery on the Forest. Barney Lake, with BVCT and sterile hybrid tiger trout, is a high quality recreational lake fishery. Amphibian species include boreal toad, boreal chorus frogs, and tiger salamanders. Monroe Mountain is part of the Sevier River Basin, a closed system draining into the Great Basin.  The Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (UDWR) manages the wildlife and fish populations. The Forest Service is responsible to focus on management of habitat to maintain viability of species that are within its jurisdiction. Close cooperation among the various agencies, governments, and other jurisdictions is necessary to provide proper management of wildlife and fisheries resources.  Land 3.4.2 and Resource Management Plan Management Area Description and applicable Goals, General Direction and Standard and Guidelines The proposed project is primarily located within management area (MA) 4B – emphasis on Management Indicator Species (MIS). Other MAs are 6B – grazing, 7B – timber, 9F – watershed, and 5A – winter range. A small but important area of 4A – fisheries emphasis, is located along Manning Creek. There are Forest-wide goals, objectives, standards, and guidelines that apply to maintaining fisheries values in the project area (USFS 1986).  Applicable LRMP goals applying to aquatic biota and their habitat across all MAs are to: “protect aquatic habitats which are in good or excellent condition and improve habitats where ecological conditions are below biological potential” (IV-3), “identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals” (IV-4), “maintain water quality to meet State standards” (IV-4), and “maintain productive streams, lakes, and riparian areas…” (IV-4).  Applicable Forest-wide general direction for trout is to “Manage waters capable of supporting self-sustaining trout populations to provide for those populations” (IV-18). Four standard and guidelines tiered to this are: a) maintain 40 percent or more overhanging grasses, forbs, sedges, and shrubs along banks of streams, b) maintain 50 percent or more of total streambank length in stable condition where natural conditions allow, c) no more than 25 percent of stream substrate should be covered by inorganic sediment less than 3.2 millimeters in size where natural conditions allow, and d) maintain a [aquatic macroinvertebrate] [Biotic] Condition Index (BCI) of 75 or greater (IV-18, IV-19).  There are also riparian area management general direction, and standards and guidelines that apply Forest-wide. The main applicable direction is “special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet” (IV-33). The standard and guideline for this direction is to “maintain riparian dependent resource values including wildlife, fish…in a stable or upward trend” (IV-33 to 34).  There are general management requirements given in the LRMP for vegetation treated by burning (FP IV-48 thru 49) that apply to wildlife and fisheries habitat. These are to use prescribed fire from planned and unplanned ignitions to accomplish resource management objectives, such as reducing fuel load buildup, wildlife habitat improvement, etc., and limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values.  Management area 4A is managed for emphasis on fish habitat improvement where aquatic habitat is below productive potential. The one area of MA 4A within the project area is Manning Creek downstream from Manning Meadow Reservoir to the Forest boundary. It does not include the tributaries. The goals of management are to maintain or improve aquatic habitat condition for fish at or above a good habitat condition rating, maintain stable stream channels, meet water quality standards for cold-water fisheries, and provide healthy, self-perpetuation riparian plant communities (FP IV-85). General direction, and standards and guidelines for MA 4A are similar to and tier to these goals and can be found in the LRMP on pages IV-86 to IV-94. There are two applicable general directions: “prevent stream channel instability, loss of channel cross-sectional areas, and loss of water quality resulting from activities that alter vegetative cover,” and “determine the effects on water quality and sediment yields from vegetation manipulation and road construction projects through the use of appropriate modeling and quantification procedures” (IV-91).  Other MAs do not have any specific general direction or standards and guidelines that apply to aquatic biota, but the Forest-wide general direction and standards and guidelines apply across all MAs.  Aquatic Biota C 3.4.3 umulative Effects Area The cumulative effects area (CEA) for the aquatic species that will be analyzed in this document includes the aquatic habitat contained in the sub-watersheds within the Monroe Mountain unit Forest Boundary that contains the project area. See Figure 72 for a map of the modified Hydrological Unit Code (HUC) 6th field watersheds [afterwards called HUC6] that are included in this CEA.     Figure 72. Project area HUC6 map and cumulative effects area (see text for additional description).  Many of the HUC6s as nationally defined include large areas of face drainages (i.e. short slopes) on the sides of mountains that do not interact with the main tributary stream on the Forest, but instead include a segment of the larger valley bottom stream channel, and even areas across these major streams such as Otter Creek and the Sevier River (for example see the Thompson Creek – Sevier River HUC in Figure 72). In most cases, streams become disconnected near the Forest boundary by irrigation diversions. These were often placed near the head of alluvial fans and losing reaches. Due to this disconnect, analysis of the complete HUC below the diversion is unwarranted. It also artificially diminishes the calculated affects from projects on the Forest. Using a pour point at the diversion ensures that the area that supports the aquatic populations and the areas of maximum effects are included in analysis, while extraneous areas that would artificially dilute effects are not.  Therefore, many of the HUC6 subwatersheds were modified to a pour point at the diversion structure, losing reach, or Forest boundary. The redefined HUC6s that support important aquatic resources – major lakes and streams with fish populations and/or boreal toads have been analyzed in more detail using GIS tools for the analysis section of the document. In addition, smaller HUC7 and HUC8 subwatersheds within these HUC6s were broken out where they contained important lakes that are high value for fisheries and boreal toads. To simplify GIS analysis, the GIS runs were done one time for all the polygon pieces (i.e. in upper Manning Creek analysis included one polygon for most of the subwatershed, and two smaller ones that were split out with lakes). For an overview of the entire modified HUC6, the three polygons were recombined into the tables arithmetically.  Starting in the southwest corner of the Monroe Mountain CEA and working clockwise, which is the order they are discussed in following sections of the document, the subwatersheds analyzed in detail are: Upper Dry Creek; Upper Manning Creek (with subwatersheds Barney Lake and Manning Reservoir); the subwatershed Hunts Lake in Dry Canyon (the main Dry Canyon does not support aquatic resources with the exception of some potential and relatively minor boreal toad use areas in the headwaters); Monroe Creek (with subwatershed Magleby Lake); Thompson Creek - only some GIS criteria were developed due to the HUC configuration (including subwatershed Annabella Reservoir); Water Creek - only some GIS criteria were developed due to the HUC configuration (including subwatershed Big Lake); Koosharem Creek; Greenwich Creek; and Box Creek – split into upper and lower subwatersheds.  Threatened, Endangered, 3.4.4 and Candidate Species Current policy for threatened and endangered species as stated in the Forest Service Manual 2670.3 (Washington Office Amendment 2600-95-7; USFS 1995) includes the following direction:  1. Place top priority on conservation and recovery of endangered, threatened, and proposed species and their habitats through relevant National Forest System, State and private gorestry, and tesearch activities and programs. 2. Establish through the Forest planning process objectives for habitat management and/or recovery of populations, in cooperation with States, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) (or National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS)), and other Federal agencies. 3. Through the biological assessment process, review actions and programs authorized, funded, or carried out by the Forest Service to determine their potential for effect on threatened and endangered species and species proposed for listing. 4. Avoid all adverse impacts on threatened and endangered species and their habitats except when it is possible to compensate adverse effects totally through alternatives identified in a biological opinion rendered by the USFWS; when an exemption has been granted under the act, or when the USFWS biological opinion recognizes an incidental taking. Avoid adverse impacts on species proposed for listing during the conference period and while their Federal status is being determined. 5. Initiate consultation or conference with the USFWS or NMFS, when the Forest Service determines that the proposed activities may have an adverse effect on threatened, endangered species; is likely to jeopardize the continued existence of a proposed species; or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical or proposed critical habitat. 6. Identify and prescribe measures to prevent adverse modification or destruction of critical habitat or other habitats essential for the conservation of endangered, threatened, and proposed species. Protect individual organisms or populations from harm or harassment as appropriate.  Field surveys were completed within the project area to analyze habitat for aquatic species and their populations numerous times between 1999 and 2014. As a result of these visits and through consultation with state and federal agencies, it is known that there are currently no threatened, endangered, or candidate aquatic species on the Fishlake National Forest. Since no threatened, endangered, or candidate aquatic species are present on the Forest, and therefore none within the aquatic biota CEA described above, there will be no effect to any threatened, endangered, or candidate aquatic species from this project. Therefore, there will be no further discussion for aquatic species in these categories. 3.4.5 Sensitive Species Forest Service Manual (FSM) 2670 provides management direction for threatened, endangered, and sensitive plants and animals (FSM 2670). Forest Service policies for designated sensitive species (FSM 2670.32) states:  1. Assist States in achieving their goals for conservation of endemic species. 2. As part of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process, review programs and activities, through a biological evaluation, to determine their potential effect on sensitive species. 3. Avoid or minimize impacts to species whose viability has been identified as a concern. 4. If impacts cannot be avoided, analyze the significance of potential adverse effects on the population or its habitat within the area of concern and on the species as a whole. (The line officer, with project approval authority, makes the decision to allow or disallow Table 104. Suitability of habitat for Intermountain Region sensitive aquatic species found in the project area 8,000 feet. Was considered a Utah stronghold, with relatively stable numbers but monitoring methods have not been rigorous enough to quantitatively determine trend. Chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobadidis), which is associated with population declines in other portions of their range, has recently been detected in all areas of Monroe Mountain. Declines may now be starting to be evident in some areas of Monroe Mountain. Besides their Forest Service sensitive species status, they are considered a state sensitive species in Utah and managed under a UDWR Conservation Plan that other agencies are not signatories to (Hogrefe et al. 2005).  impacts, but the decision must not result in loss of species viability or create significant trends toward Federal listing.) 5. Establish management objectives in cooperation with the States when projects on National Forest System lands may have a significant effect on sensitive species population numbers or distributions. Establish objectives for Federal candidate species, in cooperation with the USFWS or NMFS and the States.  The Forest Service follows a two-tier planning process. The first tier is the Fishlake Land and Resource Management Plan (LRMP; USFS 1986); the second is the site-specific project planning level which is represented by the NEPA analysis.  The LRMP was prepared in accordance with the NFMA of 1976, the regulations in 36 CFR 219, and the NEPA of 1979. The LRMP was approved in June 1986 (USFS 1986).  A goal documented in the LRMP is to “identify and improve habitat for sensitive, threatened, and endangered species including participation in recovery efforts for both plants and animals”. In addition the LRMP states, “Current habitat of threatened and endangered species will be maintained. No adverse effects from management activities will be allowed”. General direction in this plan states, “Maintain habitat for viable populations of existing vertebrate species. Habitat for each species on the Forest will be maintained by protecting at least 40 percent of the ecosystems for existing species. Proper juxtaposition of ecosystems must be considered. Manage and provide habitat for recovery of endangered and threatened species. Do not allow activities that would negatively impact endangered, threatened, or sensitive plant or animal species. Follow direction in recovery plans.”  Suitable habitat is present in the project area for BVCT and boreal toads. A summary of Forest aquatic biota sensitive species is included below in Table 104, above.  Life history information regarding BVCT can be found in Life History and Analysis of Endangered Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez 2006), hereby incorporated by reference. This document contains summarized population trend and monitoring information, which can also be found in Hadley et al. (2011a) and Hepworth et al. (2003). For general life history information on boreal toads, this report tiers to Rodriguez (2012) and Hogrefe et al. (2005). The Uinta-Wasatch-Cache National Forest habitat recommendations also include some general toad information, although more geared towards northern Utah (Appendix E of Whelen 2015 (appendix F of this document). Finally, Goates et al. (2007) and Goates (2006) provides life history information gleaned from the 2003-2004 radio-tracking project established to validate design features developed for an earlier Monroe Mountain planning project. Additional boreal toad information on habitat use, movements, and response to treatments is also found in the analysis section.  Due to population declines throughout their range, boreal toads were petitioned for listing as a threatened species. The USFWS determined that the southern Rocky Mountain population did not warrant listing, but that the eastern clade (which occurs in Utah) did warrant a full status review. Higher priority species are currently ahead of boreal toads in the process, but the full status review must be completed by USFWS by September 2017. It is important that boreal toad habitat and population levels in the project area not be adversely affected by project activities, as it could add pressure towards a listing decision.  To aid the reader, a short general (uncited – see above for sources of more specific information) synopsis of boreal toad general life history and habitat use on Monroe Mountain is included. Boreal toads inhabit areas of Monroe Mountain over 8,000 feet, typically over 8,500 feet. Across their range, they use many habitat types and are known to travel cross-country considerable distances, even going over mountain passes in Colorado. On Monroe Mountain, they seem closely tied to water, however, in the professional opinion of the fisheries biologist, due to the warmer and drier conditions than often found in their range. They use small mammal burrows (Photo 3) for cover and hibernate through the winter typically in a root chamber, associated with spruce-fir and willows, over a small perennial stream (Photo 11 and Photo 12). Beaver dams are important habitat features (Photo 4 and Photo 5), and can serve as hibernacula. They emerge from hibernation in early spring, breeding in slack water (ponds to depressions). By mid-summer, they disperse across the landscape, usually along streams, moving towards hibernacula in late summer. Tadpoles emerge as small toadlets in late summer, usually (based on literature studies in other areas) experiencing high mortality (adult survival, minus special stressors, is usually fairly high). Experience on Monroe has shown they occur in relatively low density even in prime habitat. Chytrid fungus has been a major factor in boreal toad population declines across their range. Monroe Mountain had been considered chytrid free, with 2006 samples all negative, but in 2012 samples documented chytrid in the Manning Creek watershed at Manning Reservoir and Barney Lake and the Monroe Creek watershed at Magleby Reservoir. Surveys in 2013 found chytrid at all locations submitted for testing, but not every sample (i.e. toad) was positive (Forest files data). Maintaining healthy riparian areas along streams and lakes with cool microsites (toads favor warm shallow water for laying their eggs to speed tadpole development, but need cooler and moister conditions for themselves on land), large wood (Photo 1 and Photo 2), diverse habitats with minimal human disturbance, good water quality in lakes, and good watershed function in streams are all important for long-term boreal toad persistence.    Photo 1. Large wood forms an important habitat component for boreal toads at the upland/water interface for cover, shelter, food. Searching for toads near large wood at Manning Meadow Reservoir.    Photo 2. This large log at Barney Lake often was host to several basking toads that could retreat into the large fissure for cover.  Photo 3. Boreal toads use small mammal burrows for shelter and cover, but this raises the risk that toads con become trapped and entombed in burrows that are crushed by equipment. This photo shows a boreal toad in a burrow in upper Manning Creek    Photo 4. Beaver pond in upper South Fork of Box Creek    Photo 5. Radio tracking a boreal toad on North Fork of Box Creek. Note the beaver pond in the background.  Aquatic M 3.4.6 anagement Indicator Species Planning regulations in the first round of forest planning directed Forests to identify management indicator species (MIS; Table 105). These species are selected and monitored to indicate change in habitat quality resulting from activities on the Forest.  Aquatic MIS that were selected for the Forest include BVCT (emphasis MIS and also a Forest Service Region 4 sensitive species), resident trout, and aquatic macro-invertebrates. Trout species that represent resident trout in the project area are brown, cutthroat, rainbow and brook trout. Information regarding MIS can be found in Life History and Analysis of Endangered Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and Management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez 2006). This document contains summarized population trend and monitoring information for the Forest. Site specific and more recent information is included in this aquatic biota report, while more general information can be found Rodriguez 2006 (hereby incorporated by reference).  Many of the selected MIS occur and range far beyond a local scale such as a project analysis area. Individuals, family groups, or herds of some animals such as elk or birds, annually use areas much larger area than a typical project area and population trend must be examined on a much larger scale to be meaningful. For NFMA implementation, this scale is the Fishlake National Forest. For aquatic species, populations are often best monitored at the watershed or sub-watershed scale (depending on species distribution, barriers, etc.). For aquatic species such as trout, population samples can be obtained at the project level to determine the approximate number utilizing habitat within the project area. Samping is easier for true aquatic species since they are confined to the water habitat. At a site-specific project level there is fluctuation in numbers, however, due to both yearly variations and spatial shifts of individuals. These population samples are really index samples rather than true population estimates. It would be difficult to detect minor changes in local numbers using an area, but large changes due to major habitat degradations or major habitat improvements have been noted in Forest sampling. It must be kept in mind that a individual project area may contribute to the total population trend but does not usually make up the entire population and trend, unless they are a locally endemic or restricted species. For this reason, it is not necessarily always appropriate to determine population trend at a local level.  Population trend for threatened, endangered and candidate species is addressed using recovery plans or conservation assessments, strategies and agreements. These broad scale documents are used because they occur and range far beyond the scale of the forest.  The following information was used to determine if aquatic management indicator species or their habitat is present within the project area:  • Life History and Analysis of Endangered, Threatened, Candidate, Sensitive, and management Indicator Species of the Fishlake National Forest (Rodriguez 2006). • Information and response from the UDWR and USFWS. • Aquatic biota field surveys including fish population transects and aquatic macroinvertebrate sample collection.  Based on office file review, field review, discussion with hydrologists, and UDWR biologists, the aquatic resources of concern, in roughly descending order in the project area are the BVCT broodstock in Manning Meadow Reservoir, boreal toads and their habitat across the mountain, the BVCT population in Manning Creek and its tributaries, the BVCT lake habitat and trophy/high quality fisheries in Barney Lake (also includes sterile tiger trout) and Manning Meadow Reservoir, recreation lake fisheries, and resident trout streams (Figure 73 and Figure 74).  Table 105. Names and status of aquatic Management Indicator Species (MIS) known or suspected to occur in the project area, as well as suitable habitat. See UDWR web page for current stocking information. The information here was verified on the 2014 stocking page. In addition, to the species listed in this table, native BVCT are stocked into Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake (see Table 104 above) and sterile hybrid tiger trout are stocked into upper and lower Box Creek reservoirs and Barney Lake. Common/Scientific Name Status SUITABLE HABITAT IN PROJECT AREA Rationale/Comments Lake Trout Salvelinus namaycush  MIS   Not in project area. Requires deep, cold lakes with good (clear and limited nutrients) water quality. Brown Trout Salmo trutta  MIS X Occur in project area. Cutthroat Trout Oncorhynchus  MIS X  Hybrid cutthroat trout (not pure BVCT) may occur in some project area waters. Rainbow Trout Salmo gairdneri richardson  MIS X Occurs in project area. Catchable rainbows are stocked into Annabella Reservoir, Big Lake, Deep Lake, and upper and lower Box Creek Reservoirs. Brook Trout Salvelinus fontinalis  MIS X Occurs in project area. Stocked into Box Creek Reservoirs. Common in upper Box Creek and headwaters of Monroe Creek. Aquatic Macroinvertebrates MIS X Occur in project waters.         Figure 73. Stream fisheries resources on Monroe Mountain   Figure 74. Mapped key boreal toad habitat  3.4.7 Aquatic Field Review For the aquatic review and analysis sections, the Monroe Mountain subwatersheds containing aquatic resources are described from the southwest part of the mountain in Dry Creek clockwise around to Box Creek. 3.4.7.1 Dry Creek HUC6- 160300030102 (Dry Creek) General Field Inspections  Dry Creek is an important drainage for boreal toads in its upper elevations. Water flow is relatively low. Livestock use in the drainage bottom seems high when observed mid-late season, at or above grazing standards.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  No Integrated Riparian Evaluation (IRE) surveys have been conducted in this drainage. Due to its importance for boreal toads, they should be conducted in the future.  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  Dry Creek has too low of streamflow to support fish.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  Aquatic macroinvertebrates occur in Dry Creek, but given that the stream does not support trout, their use as a MIS does not apply.  Boreal Toad Dry Creek was first surveyed for boreal toads in recent times in 1998, when several juvenile toads and about 500 tadpoles were seen in 3 different areas in the upper Dry Creek drainage, including a small pond, a small pond near the Dry Creek Guard Station, and a stock watering pond (Fridell et al. 2000). Boreal toad reproduction could often be found at this stock pond in the 2000 to 2010 timeframe. This area was studied with radio tracking in 2003 to 2004, including by the Forest fisheries biologist, documenting movements between the stock pond and Dry Creek Guard Station (results summarized in Goates et al. 2007 and Goates 2006). Five boreal toads were found on two tributaries of Dry Creek in 2014 UDWR surveys (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). It was the first time these tributaries had been surveyed for boreal toads.   3.4.7.2 Upper Manning Creek HUC6- 160300030104 (Manning Creek, Manning Meadow Reservoir, Barney Lake) General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist on Manning Creek from 1999 to 2014. These field visits showed that overall the Manning Creek watershed is in good condition. Use levels range from moderate to relatively high but generally within standards in the uppermost watershed, depending on the year and weather conditions, by both livestock and elk. There are other land use impacts in this area, including high levels of off-road use, dispersed camping, and general recreational use, and cabin development on private land. Below the road, crossing the stream becomes quickly inaccessible with nearly pristine conditions. The lower watershed near the Forest boundary does have some impacts from livestock trailing up Straight Canyon, which is an intermittent tributary, a low-standard road, and an old diversion structure.  Nutrient loading is known to be a problem in Manning Meadow Reservoir. The underlying geology on Monroe Mountain is high in phosphates. Activities that disturb the soil, and put sediment into watercourses can increase nutrient levels, as can wildfires and prescribed burning. Animal manure is also high in nutrients. Cattle graze the area above Manning Meadow Reservoir and there are high numbers of elk using the area. Finally, cabin development on private land above the reservoir is likely contributing nutrients from septic systems. The Forest collected additional water quality monitoring samples in cooperation with the State of Utah in late 2006 and early 2007. Water samples show high phosphate levels in the lake and low oxygen levels at depth.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  Manning Creek  Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 9 percent for Manning Creek, and a mean Pfankuch stability rating of 48.1, which indicates a very stable and erosion resistant stream. Manning Creek was composed of 21 “A” channel types and 7 “B” channel types.  Petty (2004, page 3) described the trout habitat in Manning Creek, noting, “The trout habitat was very good and many were seen above reach F1-7. Deep pools scoured by log and rock pourovers as well as undercut banks characterize much of the habitat. Spawning and macro invertebrate habitat may be limiting the size and production of fish, although fish were abundant in most of the creek. Fish migration upstream will not occur due to the waterfalls noted in reaches F1-20 and F1-22. Several anglers were seen on the creek above reach F1-28. The terrain of the middle reaches prevents access to the casual angler, but for those who are willing to either hike several miles or scale 30 to 40 foot cliffs, the fishing should be very good.”  Petty (2004, page 6) summarized the riparian vegetation condition, noting, “The condition of the riparian vegetative resource along Manning Creek is excellent and flourishing. The only exception is the existence of invasive weeds, especially in areas that are frequented by various recreation and other human impacts.”  Petty (2004, page 6) recommendations were “The management of Manning Creek appears to be maintaining stable hydrologic and vegetation resources… …Cattle grazing was most apparent during our survey in reaches F1-30 through F1-33, although forage resources are maintaining adequate cover and vigor through what appears to be moderate utilization. However, annual utilization surveys in these upper meadows would insure these valuable resources are maintained. Trout are thriving in the creek and habitat is well maintained.”  Barney Creek  Barney Creek is marginal, and fish surveys only found trout use in the lower half. Petty (2004) surveyed the stream and did not note fish. Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 10.7 percent and a mean Pfankuch stability rating of 48.7, which is considered good. Barney Creek was mostly “A” channels with the lowest reach being a “B” channel type. The primary resource issue of concern Petty (2004) noted was off-road use, documenting pioneering off-road use down the creek below the reservoir. Petty (2004) did not observe any evidence of cattle grazing along Barney Creek.  Collins Creek  Collins Creek is a fishless tributary to Manning Creek. Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 12.7 percent. The stream was composed of “A” channel types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 65.3, which is considered good. Petty (2004, page 10) summarized conditions by noting, “The current management of Collins Creek is maintaining the riparian resource in good to excellent condition. Impact by humans was difficult to find, although the herbaceous vegetation community was heavily grazed around the spring in the upper portions of reach F3-7.”  East Fork Manning Creek  East Fork Manning Creek is a small tributary to Manning Creek that fish go a short ways up. Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 4.3 percent. The stream was composed of primarily “B” channel types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 57, which is considered good. Concerning vegetation conditions on East Fork of Manning Creek, Petty (2004 pages 11 and 12) found that “The vegetation documented in the riparian areas of the East Fork of Manning Creek is in good to excellent condition. This area could be used as an example of the potential of mountain meadow streams. Grazing by cattle was noted, but the impacts of grazing were negligible. Elk have been using the upper meadow in reach F4-2b more than cattle.”  Vale Creek  Vale Creek is a small tributary to Manning Creek that is used by fish. Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 6 percent. The stream was composed of primarily “B” channel types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 62.5, which is considered good. Petty (2004) noted some grazing in the upper meadows but found the stream to be stable and in generally good condition.  Straight Canyon  Straight Canyon is an intermittent small fishless tributary to Manning Creek. Petty (2004) measured an average stream slope of 14.9 percent. The stream was composed of “A” channel types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 97, which is considered fair. Petty (2004) noted that this was the only area in the Manning Creek watershed where he observed heavy cattle grazing. Petty (2004) recommended that cattle grazing management should be investigated in this drainage, especially the trailing along the creek. Petty (2004) also noted off-road vehicle problems in this drainage.  IRE Streambank Stability Summary  When adjusted for channel type, the Pfankuch stability ratings for Manning Creek and its tributaries were 77.5 percent good, 14.4 percent fair, and 8.1 percent poor (see Appendix I, Table I-2 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F of this EIS)).  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  Stream Monitoring  Manning Creek and its tributaries were monitored for fisheries in 2001 by electroshocking. The data is summarized in Hepworth et al. (2003). Three stations were conducted along the mainstem, the lowermost on Bureau of Land Management lands, the middle a little above the Forest boundary, and the upper near the confluence with Collins Creek. Some of the most pristine and difficult to access terrain was not monitored. If the native BVCT are doing well at the monitoring sites selected, however, they will also be doing well in the more rugged stream reaches. The 2001 data found 451 fish per mile and 40 pounds per acre at the upper station a little below the road crossing below Manning Meadow Reservoir. The station near the Forest boundary in the lower part of the project area had 933 fish per mile and 92 pounds per acre. Finally, the Bureau of Land Management site had 515 fish per mile and 52 pounds per acre (data in Hepworth et al. 2003). This data shows good fish numbers and about average biomass. Reproduction and multiple age classes were found in all parts of the stream. Given the relatively recent reintroduction of BVCT into this stream, following renovation treatments in 1996, the results of this monitoring was considered satisfactory. Manning Creek was re-monitored in 2008; the data are summarized in Hadley et al. (2011a). Occupied stream miles stayed the same for the mainstem and all tributaries. When all three stations were averaged, the 2008 sampling showed a 13 percent increase in fish biomass compared to 2001 (Hadley et al. 2011a).  Three tributaries were also monitored. Barney Fork is marginal and fish only use the lower half of the stream. In 2001, this station had 64 fish per mile and 5.2 pounds per acre (Hepworth et al. 2003). By 2008, this station’s biomass had increased an incredible 350 percent (Hadley et al. 2011a). It is likely that wetter conditions and thus higher stream flow attracted more fish up this drainage compared to the earlier sample. In 2001, East Fork of Manning Creek also has low flow, and had 32 fish per mile and 12.9 pounds per acre (Hepworth et al. 2003). In 2008, East Fork of Manning Creek station’s biomass had negligibly increased (less than 10 percent, Hadley et al. 2011a). The slightly larger Vale Creek had 821 fish per mile and 12.8 pounds per acre in 2001 (Hepworth et al. 2003). By 2008, Vale Creek station’s biomass had increased 21 percent (Hadley et al. 2011a). It appears that these tributary streams are all important spawning areas for BVCT.  Manning Meadow Reservoir  Manning Meadow Reservoir is an important broodstock, producing BVCT eggs for the southern Utah region of the UDWR. Fishlake National Forest fisheries personnel assist in the broodstock operation. The fish produced from this broodstock are used both to start new conservation populations and for sport fishing, where they have replaced the use of the non-native subspecies Yellowstone cutthroat trout. Yearly monitoring of the egg take provides trend data for the broodstock operations.  Data up to 2004 was summarized in Hepworth et al. (2004). The broodstock first began operation in 1992. By 1999, the broodstock was producing nearly 200,000 eggs. Production slipped slightly to about 173,000 eggs in 2000, but was over 200,000 eggs per year from 2001 to 2004 (Hepworth et al. 2004). Results from 2005 were about average, but in 2006 a missing age class and loss of some of the over-mature fish from the population resulted in a decline with about 130,000 eggs taken. The operation rebounded in 2007 with a new age class reaching maturity, however, resulting in a record egg take of over 400,000 eggs.  More recent egg take figures are included in Hadley and Hepworth (2013). Egg numbers peaked in 2011 at over 600,000 but took a large decline in 2013 with only 228,000 eggs collected (Hadley and Hepworth 2013). These lower numbers can be problematic, as some fish are lost in various stages of rearing in the hatchery system. In 2013, 43 percent of the eggs were successfully raised to fish for stocking. This was barely adequate to cover the southern region UDWR stocking quota needs (Hadley and Hepworth 2013), and does not leave any extra for special projects or unforeseen needs.  In 2014, the Manning Meadow broodstock spawning operation collected over 500,000 BVCT eggs. Good survival in the hatchery led to an abundance of BVCT for fall stocking. These high numbers of BVCT were crucial, in addition to normal uses/waters, as considerable BVCT were needed for jumpstarting the Clear Creek metapopulation following the completion of rotenone treatments that followed severe fish declines from post-fire flooding off the Twitchell Canyon fire. This included conservation population stocking in lower Clear Creek, Mill Creek, Fish Creek, upper Clear Creek, and Shingle Creek. In addition, a supplemental plant of BVCT was made into Pine Creek (Bullion Canyon) and a sport-fish planting in Oak Creek. With many tens of miles of fish habitat needing reintroductions, the Manning Meadow broodstock was a critical resource in this projects success (Photo 6 below).  Gill netting of Manning Meadow Reservoir takes place each year with broodstock operations, in part to monitor population status, critical for maintaining egg take, and to help in fish collection for disease certification. Hadley (2013a) is the latest report on lake monitoring. Hadley (2013a) found that the low numbers of eggs taken in 2013 were due to an issue with the 2009 plant (cohort), but that the 2010 stocking was doing well, which would indicate a likely increase in eggs in 2014 [which turned out to be the case]. Hadley (2013a) recommended maintaining the current stocking regime.  Water quality is a concern at Manning Meadow Reservoir. Much of the year the majority of the water column is too deficient in oxygen (anoxic) to support trout, which are thus limited to the upper surface layer. The above description shows that the broodstock is sufficient to meet needs on a good year, but clearly, the excess nutrients are limiting the biomass that the lake could support, and if water quality were improved, recreational fishing would likely improve. Conversely, additional nutrients would likely reduce broodstock production and fishing quality. Probable current sources of the excess nutrients are the volcanic geology, private cabin development above the reservoir, the road alongside the reservoir (a project was undertaken in 2010 to reduce road impacts to the lake), livestock and wild ungulate grazing (the area upstream of the reservoir holds a large herd of elk for much of the summer).    Photo 6. Stocking a new conservation population stream segment on lower Clear Creek on the Fishlake National Forest, Beaver Ranger District with about 15,000 Manning Meadow Reservoir broodstock BVCT fry in October 2014     Barney Lake  Barney Lake is a high quality recreational fishery containing native BVCT and sterile tiger trout. It is known to produce some nice fish to the angler, but can be hard to fish. There is no natural reproduction so fishing success, fish numbers, size, and condition is set by the interplay of angler use, harvest, and stocking (species, numbers, size, and season). As a put-and-take fishery, habitat conditions are secondary up to the point that they are not detrimental to the fishery. Increasing sedimenation of the lake was noted due to off-road vehicle use around the lake in the late 2000s, which did raise habitat concerns.  To assess fisheries trends, make stocking change recommendations, and evaluate changes, Barney Lake was gill netted in summer 2008 (Hadley 2008) and 2013 (Hadley 2013b). In 2008, the gill netting found greatly increased numbers of tiger trout and decreased numbers of BVCT compared to the previous netting in 1994, 1997, and 2001. The largest tiger trout caught was 20 inches long and weighed 2.8 pounds. Hadley (2008) recommended increasing the number of BVCT, stocking them at larger sizes, Hadley (2008) noted that water qaulity issues and/or higher tiger trout stocking may have impacted the BVCT. In 2013 survey was conducted to see changes resulting from stocking BVCT as holdovers (7-inch) verses fry (2-inch) and stocking reduced numbers of tiger trout. The catch rate was up, with considerable more BVCT, and length, weight, and condition of both species was at or above long-term means (Hadley 2013b). Due to a decrease in angler catch rates, Hadley (2013b) did recommend increasing tiger trout stocking slightly from recent numbers. Hadley (2013b) also noted that ATV fencing was installed by the Forest (in a multi-agency cooperative project) in 2010 along with a parking area to reduce vehicle disturbance around the lake and improve water quality.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  Four aquatic macroinvertebrate sample stations have been collected on the Fishlake National Forest portion of Manning Creek since 1988 in the project area. A comprehensive analysis of aquatic macroinvertebrates on Manning Creek was undertaken to assess the effects of the renovation treatments on them, and determine if additional mitigation measures were necessary (Whelan 2002). This monitoring shows that the upper watershed stations have generally been above the LRMP standard and guideline level with static trend. The lowest station near the Forest boundary had been below the LRMP standard and guideline level with static trend (Whelan 2002). The reasons for the lower score near the Forest boundary are not fully understood, but are likely partially related to effects from the low-standard road, a diversion structure (impacts from the construction and maintenance of this structure were noted by Petty (2004), and livestock trailing and general use up Straight Canyon.  Boreal Toad  The upper Manning drainage was first surveyed in modern times in 1995, when numerous adults and 10 egg stands were documented in Manning Meadow Reservoir and 32 adult toads were seen at the Manning Barney confluence (Fridell et al. 2000). The beaver ponds at this confluence were re-checked in 1996 and 3 toads and 28 tadpoles were observed (Fridell et al. 2000). Numerous areas were checked in 1997 when 6 toads were found at the confluence in spite of the beaver dam being breached (i.e. poorer habitat). At Barney Lake 25 toads were ToadDistance  Figure 75. Boreal toad locations mapped over aerial photos and vegetation maps with 300-foot streamside and 900-foot breeding site buffers (2003 through 2004 data with original 2000 Monroe Mountain EIS project buffer zones). This map shows heavy toad use along a small unmapped (in corporate GIS dataset) perennial stream northeast of the lake.    Figure 76. This map shows the importance of the larger buffer around an important breeding lake  found and observed leaving and entering small mammal burrows. They also documented a boreal toad mortality in 1997 on Forest Road 083 (Fridell et al. 2000). In 1998 surveys documented 4 adults and 580 plus tadpoles at Manning Meadow Reservoir, several adults at the Manning/Barney confluence, a boreal toad on East Fork of Manning Creek, and 29 adults and 530 tadpoles at Barney Lake (Fridell et al. 2000).  The Manning Creek drainage was considered a key boreal toad area in the early 2000s, where toads, egg masses, and tadpoles were always easy to find. It was a core area studied in the 2003 through 2004 radio tracking study (Goates et al. 2007; Goates 2006; also see Figure 75 and Figure 76 for examples of toad location data plotted in this drainage).  Utah Division of Wildlife Resource surveys in 2010 documented three boreal toads at Barney Lake, including an adult female missing a right hind leg, and six adult toads at Barney Kettle, with active reproduction occurring and one previously deposited egg mass (Lien and Wheeler 2010). At the Barney/Manning confluence 3 adult toads, 13 juvenile toads, and 1 egg strand were documented, and at Manning Meadow Reservoir 6 adult toads (1 dead, and 1 with leeches), 2 juveniles, and 2 egg strands were observed (Lien and Wheeler 2010).  Surveys of the Barney Kettle in 2014 documented no boreal toads or reproduction, the fourth year no reproduction was found (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). Only one boreal toad was found at the confluence in these surveys and no reproduction, although there is no recent beaver activity and low water in remnant ponds. This was the lowest number of boreal toads observed at the site since 1997 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). A visit in later July by UDWR did find two adult females at Manning Meadows Reservoir, two adult females at Barney Lake, but no boreal toads at the Barney Kettle (Wheeler 2014). The Forest fisheries biologist did not document any boreal toads at Manning Meadow Reservoir, Barney Lake, or the confluence in 2014 in two field visits. This would have been considered unfathomable 10 years earlier. The UDWR breeding surveys should be considered presence/absence, and it is not considered reliable to infer trend data from it (K. Wheeler, UDWR Native Aquatics biologist, email communication July 28, 2014). In 2014, for surveys of less checked areas, one boreal toad was encountered in 2014 between the Barney/Manning confluence and Collins Creek and a dead boreal toad was found at White Ledge Spring (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). These surveys found heavy grazing in the East Fork of Manning Creek drainage. 3.4.7.3 Dry Canyon HUC6 - 160300030303 (Hunts Lake)  General Field Inspections  Hunts Lake contains fish, tiger salamanders, and boreal toads. Small carp are known from this lake. It is not an important recreational fishery.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  The small area surrounding the lakes does not really warrant these surveys.  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  No fish surveys occur in Hunts Lake.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  Does not apply as an MIS for lake habitat.  Boreal Toad  Hunts Lake was first surveyed in recent times for boreal toad in June 1995, when two egg strands were found in the middle pond with emergent vegetation, and in 1998 when an adult was found at the middle pond (Fridell et al. 2000). Boreal toads have been seen by the Forest’s fisheries biologist in the early to mid-2000s in this area. 3.4.7.4 Monroe Creek HUC6- 160300030308 (Monroe Creek, Magleby Reservoir) General Field Inspections  The headwaters of Monroe Creek are important boreal toad habitat. They have not been well looked at for other uses.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  Monroe Creek has not been surveyed using the IRE methodology. Given its importance for boreal toads, recreational fisheries, wildlife habitat, and watershed function, it should be surveyed in the future.  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  A fish population transect was sampled on lower Monroe Creek near Monrovian Park in about 2000. This survey found good biomass, but it was comprised of very high numbers of small wild rainbow trout. This drainage needs additional fisheries surveys.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  No aquatic macroinvertebrate samples have been collected from Monroe Creek. They should be collected in conjunction with future fisheries surveys.  Boreal Toad  Magleby Reservoir, which sits on private land, has been known for some time as an important boreal toad area. The UDWR surveys in 2010 documented 4 adult toads and over 1,500 tadpoles in 5 groups (implying 5 egg masses and reproduction events) (Lien and Wheeler 2010).  Two boreal toads were found on surveys of upper Monroe Creek in 2014 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014) where a previous survey in 2001 found 4 adults, 6 juveniles, and over 350 tadpoles. One adult female boreal toad was observed at Magleby Reservoir in 2014 (Wheeler 2014). 3.4.7.5 Thompson Creek HUC6- 160300030314 (Annabella Reservoir, Deep Lake) General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist while traveling through the area several times from 1999 and 2014. Some livestock grazing use was noted around the reservoirs, but there was also disturbance from off-road and recreational use around the lakes. The primary concern noted with these lakes is water fluctuation due to water management and a propensity to winterkill due to the shallow water levels.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  There is no IRE Level II survey data.  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  Annabella Reservoir and Deep Lake are basically put-and-take recreational fisheries based on annual stocking with no over-wintering of fish (see Hadley 2014 for additional information).  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  As noted above, due to the lack of trout supporting streams, aquatic macroinvertebrate sampling does not apply.  Boreal Toad  The UDWR surveys at Deep Lake in 2010 found 4 adult and 1 dead juvenile toad (Lien and Wheeler 2010). Survey of a meadow north of Deep Lake found one adult and one juvenile toad, with deep off-road vehicle ruts made through the meadow, although a recent closure appeared to block further off-road vehicle traffic through the meadow (Lien and Wheeler 2010).  No boreal toads were observed at Deep Lake in 2014, despite the fact that they have been observed there most years since 2000 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014) and the fact that the 2013 survey found seven adults and six egg strands. One boreal toad was found in surveys of ten ponds near Annabella Lake (Wheeler and McCormick 2014). 3.4.7.6 Water Creek HUC6- 160300030316 (Big Lake) General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist while traveling through the area several times 1999 and 2014. Some livestock grazing use was noted around the reservoirs, but there was also disturbance from off-road and recreational use around the lakes. The primary concern noted with these lakes is water fluctuation due to water management and a propensity to winterkill due to the shallow water levels.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  There is no IRE Level II survey data.  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  In 2007, hook-and-rod sampling was conducted at Big Lake in early summer. Several catchable rainbow trout were caught in less than an hour, which shows good sport fishing conditions. Big Lake is basically a put-and-take recreational fishery based on annual stocking with no overwintering of fish (see Hadley 2014 for additional information).  In September 2014, A. Solt, Fishlake National Forest hydrologist, noted a cyanobacteria bloom (blue-green algae pond scum) on Big Lake, indicative of nutrient issues.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  As noted above, due to the lack of trout supporting streams, aquatic macroinvertebrate sampling does not apply.  Boreal Toad  The fisheries biologist has seen adult boreal toads and tadpoles in Big Lake in the 2000 to 2010 timeframe. Surveys in 2013 found 11 boreal toads and over 1000 tadpoles on the Central Pasture and Christensen Spring tributary above Big Lake, where much of the habitat surveyed was within conifer stands (Wheeler 2013). Boreal toads were also observed in Henries Hollow and Long Flat tributaries a boreal toad and about 190 tadpoles in the White Pine Creek tributary (Wheeler 2013). 3.4.7.7 Koosharem Creek HUC6- 160300030406 (Koosharem Creek) General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist in the project area between 1999 and 2014. These field visits showed that the mid-lower elevation ranges of these creeks are generally inaccessible to livestock and motorized vehicle use and are in good to excellent condition. The upper elevation ranges are more accessible to livestock, motorized vehicle use, and other human recreational impacts. Wildlife use levels, deer and elk, are also high. However, Koosharem Creek is generally in better condition than many other Monroe Mountain upper elevation streams.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types Petty (2006b) measured a mean gradient on Koosharem Creek of 6 percent with gradients over 10 percent in the middle reaches. Half of the stream channels were Rosgen “A” types, with some “B”, “G”, and “E” type channels. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 64, which is considered good. Petty (2006b, page 2) noted on Koosharem Creek that, “The aquatic habitat seemed adequate to support a fishery; however, fish were rarely seen and not seen at all above reach N1-9. The trout noted in the lower reaches were thought to be German browns. Aquatic habitat may be limited by deep pools and cover habitat.”  With regard to riparian vegetation, Petty (2006b, page 8) noted, “Riparian plant communities along the upper reaches of Koosharem Creek (N1-12 to N1-17) are characterized by lush cover of perennial grasses and grass-like species in the understory, tall coniferous tree cover in the overstory and abundant willow cover in the mid-canopy levels. Reaches N1-15 and N1-14b are dominated by lush mesic graminoid meadows.”  In his management recommendations, Petty (2006b, page 9) stated, “The management of Koosharem Creek appears to be maintaining stable hydrologic and vegetation resources. Evidence of cattle grazing was not noted in the riparian complexes and impacts by livestock grazing have been minimal. Evidence of four wheeler use in reaches N1-16 and N1-17 has damaged wet riparian meadows and caused soil loss. The use of off-highway vehicles should not be allowed in these areas. This stream would be an ideal location for the reintroduction of beaver, as the lack of deep pools is most likely preventing trout from using much of the upper sections of this creek.”  IRE Streambank Stability Summary  When adjusted for channel type, the Pfankuch stability ratings for Koosharem Creek were 86.1 percent good, 8.4 percent fair, and 5.6 percent poor (see Appendix I, Table I-3 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)).  Project Area Fisheries Surveys There is no fish population monitoring stations on Koosharem Creek.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory There are no aquatic macroinvertebrate monitoring stations on upper Koosharem Creek. One station was collected just upstream from the diversion on lower Koosharem Creek in 2010. Based on a preliminary predicted value Community Tolerance Quotient (CTQp) of 50, the BCI at this station was 69, which is slightly below the LRMP standard and guideline level. The proper CTQp level for this station may need further investigation.  Boreal Toad Boreal toads have been known from upper Koosharem Creek for some time, and have been seen by the Forest’s fisheries biologist in the 2000 to 2010 timeframe. In the 2002 to 2004 timeframe, an interesting finding one summer was boreal toad breeding in a tire track crossing a small seep on a rutted road into a timber sale. No boreal toads were found in UDWR surveys of Milo’s Kitchen in 2014 (Wheeler and McCormick 2014) but the area appeared to be good habitat for boreal toads. 3.4.7.8 Greenwich Creek HUC6- 160300020407 (Greenwich Creek)  General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist in the project area between 1999 and 2014. These field visits showed that the mid-lower elevation ranges of these creeks are generally inaccessible to livestock and motorized vehicle use and are in good to excellent condition. The upper elevation ranges are more accessible to livestock, motorized vehicle use, and other human recreational impacts. Wildlife use levels, deer and elk, are also high. In general, these reaches are in fair condition with some areas of poor and some areas of good condition. Observations of upper Greenwich Creek watershed are that the several tributaries have more areas of fair to poor condition compared to other Monroe Mountain drainages.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types Petty (2006b) measured a mean gradient on Greenwich Creek of 8 percent. The majority of the stream channels were Rosgen “A” type channels. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 67, which is considered good, but 3 reaches were rated fair. Greenwich Creek is a marginal fishery stream that Petty (2006b) indicated could support a limited fishery, but he only saw fish in the lower 4 reaches below the confluence with Thurber Creek. Grazing management was noted as adequate on this stream. On the Thurber Creek tributary to Greenwich Creek Petty (2006b) noted that the upper watershed was gentler, with a mean gradient of 8 percent and a mix of Rosgen “A”, “B”, and “C” stream channel types. The lower stream had a mean gradient of 16 percent and was composed of Rosgen “A” channel types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 83, which is considered fair, but reach M5-6 was rated as poor. Petty (2006b) found this stream to be water limited for supporting a fishery, and recommended better grazing management in livestock accessible areas. On the South Fork of Greenwich Creek Petty (2006b) measured a mean stream gradient of 8 percent. Rosgen stream types were mostly “A” with four “B” channels and one “E” channel. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 70, which is considered good, but 5 reaches were rated poor. Petty (2006b) recommended better grazing management in the upper reaches of this stream. Petty (2006b) also looked at three tributaries to South Fork of Greenwich Creek. These had mean stream gradients of about 6 to 8 percent. Two of the tributaries had mean Pfankuch stability ratings of 72 to 73, while 1 had a rating of 101, which is fair. These streams were all water limited and marginal for fisheries, and had some reaches with livestock concerns.  IRE Streambank Stability Summary  When adjusted for channel type, the Pfankuch stability ratings for Greenwich Creek and its tributaries were 57.1 percent good, 6.3 percent fair, and 36.6 percent poor (see Appendix I, Table I-4 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)).  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  There are no fish population monitoring stations on Greenwich Creek.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  There are no aquatic macroinvertebrate monitoring stations on upper Greenwich Creek. One station was collected just upstream from the diversion on lower Greenwich Creek in 2010. Based on a preliminary predicted value Community Tolerance Quotient (CTQp) of 50 the BCI at this station was 68, which is slightly below the Forest Plan standard and guideline level. The proper CTQp level for this station may need further investigation.  Boreal Toad  Boreal toads are known to use these drainages. Toads were radio tracked in this watershed by the Forest’s fisheries biologist in the trial year of 2002, but due to lower toad density and the desire for larger sample sizes, the area was not included in the 2003 to 2004 project. Surveys in 2013 did not document any boreal toads (Wheeler 2013). 3.4.7.9 Box Creek HUC6- 160300020408 (Box Creek, Box Creek Reservoirs) General Field Inspections  Field observations have been made by the Forest fisheries biologist in the project area between 1999 and 2014. These field visits showed that the mid-lower elevation ranges of these creeks are generally inaccessible to livestock and motorized vehicle use and are in good to excellent condition. The upper elevation ranges are more accessible to livestock, motorized vehicle use, and other human recreational impacts. Wildlife use levels, deer and elk, are also high. In general, these reaches are in fair condition with some areas of poor and some areas of good condition. North Fork of Box Creek are in generally better condition, although lower North Fork of Box Creek did have higher use impact levels in the 2000 to 2001 timeframe. South Fork of Box Creek has more areas of fair condition with some areas of poor condition. Stream flows are low in this stream and trout are restricted to a few higher flow areas and beaver ponds.  Integrated Riparian Evaluation Level II Surveys / Stream Channel Types  Petty (2006a) measured the average gradient below upper Box Creek reservoir as 8 percent. The stream was mostly Rosgen “A” type channels with the lower 2 reaches being “B” channels. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 64, which would be considered good. When Petty (2006) was conducting his survey he found high water discharges (approximately 20 cubic feet per second (cfs)) from the dams in early September, which was causing some resource concerns.  Petty (2006a, page 3) noted about the lower section of Box Creek that, “The aquatic habitat below the lower reservoir is protected from grazing in all but reach M1-10, where the stream is being impacted by very heavy cattle grazing. Beaver have built a series of dams on reaches M1- 9 and M1-8 that provide deep-water habitat; trout are abundant in this area.” Petty (2006a) also noted that, “The stream in the lower reaches is well shaded by dense stream bank shrubs.”  Petty (2006a) measured the average gradient on North Fork of Box Creek at 4.0 percent. The stream was mix of Rosgen “A” and “B” channels types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 63, which would be considered good. Describing the North Fork of Box Creek, Petty (2006a, page 17) noted, “Aquatic habitat found on the stream was sufficient to support trout, and many fish were seen below reach M2-10. The beaver ponds provide deep-water habitat that would not be available otherwise, and gravels appear to be well sorted to provide spawning and invertebrate habitat. Trout were seen in most reaches below the road, and fish over 14 inches in length were observed in the larger dams. Overall the aquatic habitat and fisheries were functioning well, considering the physical limits of the stream.”  Petty (2006a) found grazing use on North Fork of Box Creek to be moderate. In his recommendations Petty (2006a, page 22) noted, “Current management of North Fork Box Creek appears to be maintaining stable hydrologic and vegetation resources. Evidence of cattle grazing was not noted in the riparian and impacts by livestock grazing appear minimal. However, because beaver activity is critical within this watershed for trout deep water habitat and boreal toads, potential conflicts with livestock grazing should be closely monitored to ensure adequate regeneration of shrubs and trees used by beaver.”  On the west fork of the upper North Fork of Box Creek Petty (2006a) found the mean stream gradient to be 4 percent. He found a mix of “A” and “B” stream types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 80, which is considered fair. In his recommendations on this fork, Petty (2006a, page 24) noted, “The management of Unnamed Tributary North Fork Box Creek appears to be maintaining stable hydrologic and vegetation resources. Evidence of cattle grazing was noted in the riparian but grazing impacts appear to be concentrated at the confluence with the North Fork. Consideration should be given to limiting grazing activity in the riparian area. Although post-fire erosion appears to be stabilizing, monitoring should be considered to continue to assess this recovery.”  Petty (2006a) measured the average gradient above upper Box Creek reservoir at 2.5 percent. The stream was mix of Rosgen channels types. The mean Pfankuch stability rating was 90.1, which would be considered fair.  Petty (2006a, page 3) noted about the upper South Fork that, “The aquatic habitat above the upper reservoir is limited due to stream instability, lack of shade and the abundance of fine sediment. This area is not near its aquatic functioning potential, primarily due to impacts from livestock grazing. Trout were frequently seen in this creek, although fish of over 6 inches were seldom seen [this may be primarily due to brook trout stunting from overbreeding, a trait common to this trout species], despite the abundance of beaver ponds and deep-water habitat.” Petty (2006a) generally found grazing to be heavy on grass in the upper watershed.  IRE Streambank Stability Summary  When adjusted for channel type, the Pfankuch stability ratings for Box Creek and its tributaries were 54.2 percent good, 23.5 percent fair, and 22.3 percent poor (see Appendix I, Table I-5 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)).  Project Area Fisheries Surveys  The west fork of the North Fork of Box Creek was extensively monitored for fisheries and aquatic effects from the Oldroyd wildfire (Whelan 2003). Two stations were established, one above a high severity burned reach, and one at the lower end of the high severity burned reach. The fishery in this area was dominated by brook trout and the mean fish size was quite small. Stream flow was very low, below which (0.5 cfs late summer) trout can often survive, but the presence of deep holding pools allowed this stream reach to support the larger trout; the shallow riffle areas were used by the young fish (Whelan 2003).  Fish numbers in these 2 stations was quite high, ranging from 739 fish per mile up to 1464 fish per mile (Whelan 2003). Biomass was not determined the first year (2000) but was monitored in 2001 and 2002. In 2001, biomass ranged from 72 to 81 pounds per acre, which is slightly above average for the Forest (Hepworth 2005; Platts and McHenry 1988). In 2002, after drought reduced streamflow further and concentrated fish even more the biomass rose in the upper station to 165 pounds per acre, which is above average for the Forest. The lower station in the burned area remained at 84 pounds per acre, which may have indicated some pool filling effects from the fire (Whelan 2003). Still, overall effects from the Oldroyd wildfire were less than expected by the Forest fisheries biologist. This monitoring indicates a healthy viable wild fishery in this tributary of North Fork of Box Creek. The monitoring was repeated in 2006 and the stream still held good numbers and biomass of trout (Fishlake National Forest file data).  Water chemistry samples taken on North Fork of North Creek showed a considerable spike in phosphorus [nitrate was not tested for] in October 2000 after the Oldroyd burn, despite the fact that that the sample was not timed in order to hit expected peak levels (during or immediately initial storms over the burn) (Whelan 2003). This could indicate the prescribed burn treatments and wildfires could lead to large nutrient pulses moving down streams. These would likely be of small consequence in stream systems, but could be important if draining into the fish supporting water reservoirs on Monroe Mountain, which are already nutrient laden.  There is no fish population monitoring stations on South Fork of Box Creek. The intermittent nature of the upper and lower portions of this Creek, with trout restricted to beaver ponds and the middle more inaccessible reaches, makes stream population transect monitoring unfeasible for many parts of the creek. Periodic walk through inspections of the drainage to monitor the distribution of trout is recommended instead.  Upper and lower Box Creek Reservoirs have been stocked with rainbow and brook trout. The reservoirs function as put-and-take fisheries, and with the extreme water fluctuations due to irrigation, were managed with catchable sized rainbow stocking with little expectation of carry over. The reservoirs were monitored in 2013 by gill netting (Hadley 2013c). This sampling found rainbows to dominate the upper reservoir, with brook trout more prevalent in the lower reservoir. Good numbers were caught, but both rainbows and brook trout showed poor condition (Hadley 2013c). One interesting finding was the presence of non-native red-sided shiner, the result of an illegal introduction, likely for bait fishing. This is likely exacerbating the poor condition of the rainbow and brook trout. Based on these findings, Hadley (2013c) recommended replacing half the brook trout stocked with tiger trout, which can potentially feed on the introduced non-native non-game red shiners.  Lower Box Creek reservoir was checked by the Forest’s fisheries biologist in summer 2013, following receiving a complaint from an angler from Las Vegas, Nevada. Apparently, the Box Creek reservoirs was their planned fishing/camping destination the previous fall, but they found the water quality to be so poor (particularly the lower reservoir) as to be unsatisfactory, requiring them to change locations. During the 2013 visit, a considerable algal bloom was noted including cyanobacteria (blue-green algae pond scum), indicative of nutrient issues, on the lake. Probable sources of the excess nutrients are the volcanic geology, livestock grazing (cows were around the lake during the visit), the road accessing the lake (all water off the road drains into the lake), and the upstream vegetation treatments and 2012 planned Box Creek fire that escaped prescription.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Inventory  One aquatic macroinvertebrate station was collected from lower Box Creek near the Forest boundary in 1995. This BCI at this station was 67, which is slightly below the LRMP standard and guideline level (Rodriguez 2006). Given the relative good condition noted in the canyon above this station, the reason for this lower BCI is not fully understood. This station was repeated in 2010, with the new sample having a BCI of 67. This indicates a stable trend.  One aquatic macroinvertebrate station was collected from lower North Fork of Box Creek just above upper Box Creek reservoir in 1999, 2000, and 2001. The BCI for this station was slightly below LRMP standard and guideline levels with a generally static trend (Rodriguez 2006). This station may be affected by beaver, water management levels in the reservoir, and livestock grazing, as some livestock concerns were noted in the reaches above this station in these years as well. A sample repeated in 2010 showed a stable trend.  Two stations were collected on the west fork of North Fork of Box Creek in 2000 and 2001 (twice in 2001). These stations had BCI levels ranging from 73 to 78, which is near LRMP standard and guideline levels, with a static trend (Rodriguez 2006 and Whelan 2003), despite the effects of the Oldroyd fire.  One aquatic macroinvertebrate station was collected from South Fork of Box Creek just above upper Box Creek reservoir in 1999. The BCI at this station was below the LRMP standard and guideline level (Rodriguez 2006). Intermittent stream flow and beaver activity may be part of the reason for the low level, as when this station was revisited for later samples it was determined that the water was generally stagnant and the station could not be repeated (this was a drought year; the station supports flowing water in good years). Therefore, there is no trend data for this station.  Boreal Toad  Box Creek was first surveyed for boreal toads in recent times in 1998, when four toads were seen along North Fork of Box Creek (Fridell et al. 2000). Boreal toads were common in both the North and South Forks in the early 2000s and boreal toads were radio tracked in these drainages in the 2003 to 2004 study (Goates et al. 2007, Goates 2006). The study documented a fairly large movement by one toad that was radio tagged on a beaver pond on the North Fork. After moving slightly downstream it was lost, only found late in the season on a side tributary to the South Fork after the fisheries biologist hiked up the South Fork from upper Box Creek Reservoir on a hunch.  No boreal toads were seen in a survey on a North Fork side tributary in 2013 surveys (Wheeler 2013). Eight adult boreal toads were observed in 2013 surveys on South Fork of Box Creek tributaries in 2013, with areas of heavy grazing, willow browsing, and abundant elk sign noted (Wheeler 2013). 3.4.7.10 Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Summary Information  The LRMP requires sampling from five Forest streams per year to determine BCI trend from across the Forest, as discussed in Rodriguez (2006). While an older methodology, BCI does provide a quantitative measure of aquatic health due to overall watershed condition, land management activities, and natural disturbances. Its use would still be appropriate, particularly when combined with other aquatic macroinvertebrate indices. Workforce resources and priorities have not yet allowed for the inclusion and analysis of other indices. Note that the aquatic macroinvertebrate sampling used by the Forest only applies to streams and not lake environments. The BCI score is derived by dividing the potential or predicted Community Tolerance Quotient (CTQp) [based on site conditions and water quality] by the dominance weighted actual CTQd [an index based on the mean weighted tolerance of the actual taxa found in the sample] multiplied by 100. Some information on sampling by watershed was included in the above section. A summary of the BCI results for Monroe Mountain are shown in Table 106.   Table 106. Monroe Mountain aquatic macroinvertebrate biotic condition index (BCI) summary table. Note: Older BCI data for the table is found in Mangum (various dates) and Vinson (various dates). These reports are on file at the Fishlake National Forest Supervisor’s Office in Richfield, Utah. Sample results for 2-10 are in a spreadsheet from the Utah State University Bug Lab, which is included in the project record. STATION YEAR  88 90 95 97 99 00 01 03 10 Manning T 81 77/84 76 73 79 - - 71 - Manning 7.0 - - - - 79 - - 73 - Manning L - - 66 65 63 - - - - Manning 3 - - - 70 - - - - - Barney Cr - - - - - - - 78 - Koosharem 01 - - - - - - - - 69+ Greenwich 01 - - - - - - - - 68+ Box Cr 1 - - 67 - - - - - 67* SF Box Cr - - - - 53 - - - - NF Box 2 - - - - 69 63 65 - 68** NF Box 3 - - - - - 76 73/78 - - NF Box 4 - - - - -- 73 73/76 - -                     *Used original CTQp=53 **Used original CTQp=50 +Used preliminary CTQp=50  3.4.8 Direct and Indirect Effects 3.4.8.1 Bonneville Cutthroat Trout (Sensitive) and Resident Trout (MIS)  Direct Effects  Direct effects are impacts that directly result in the death of a fish. One example would be a water quality impact such as a major chemical spill. Another example would be equipment in a creek that directly crush and kills trout eggs are incubating in the gravel. Given the required design features listed for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project, direct effects to fisheries and aquatic biota are considered generally unlikely to occur, with the exception of a low but real risk to boreal toads of direct injury from vehicles or equipment.     Indirect Effects  Indirect effects are impacts that are not directly connected in space and time. One example would be the spread of an aquatic invasive species (AIS) that changes the ecology of an aquatic habitat, indirectly reducing the habitat quality for a native species. Another example would be sediment from a disturbance that embeds gravels, reducing spawning success, and decreasing aquatic macroinvertebrate food production.  The stream and lake habitats in the project area provides suitable habitat for these trout and fish species. Aquatic habitat conditions range from good to poor on Monroe Mountain. The actual potential of these habitats in pristine condition is not known. Existing sedimentation impacts occur from grazing and low standard roads.  The activities associated with this project are relatively low risk for AIS transfer provided the required design features are followed.  There are several potential effects to aquatic habitats and associated species that can result from timber harvest. These include increased solar radiation, decreased supply of large woody debris, erosion of streambanks, addition of logging slash, altered streamflow regime, accelerated surface erosion, increased nutrient runoff, and inputs of fine inorganic and organic matter (Robertson 1997a).  Prescribed fire can affect aquatic habitat and biota. Direct effects include heating or abrupt changes in water chemistry. Indirect effects include changes to the hydrologic regime, erosion, debris flows, woody debris, and riparian cover. All of these effects are dependent on numerous factors including fire intensity, its extent and location within a watershed, the amount and type of fuel consumed and left, soil type, soil fire temperatures, fire severity, and the frequency, timing, and intensity of precipitation events (Robertson 1997b)  The primary potential for indirectly affecting fish, aquatic macroinvertebrates, or aquatic habitats would be from the introduction of fine sediment to the streams. Fine sediment can change the species composition, diversity, and abundance of macroinvertebrates as well as suffocating trout eggs and fry (Robertson 1997a). The use of design features, mitigation measures, best management practices, and following the soil and water conservation handbook reduces the amount of sediment reaching the stream.  Also of concern would be nutrients from this sediment and nutrients from treatments such as dissolved nutrients from ash and burned areas reaching fish supporting reservoirs, where they could further overload these lakes and lead to increased fish kills, algal blooms, and anoxic conditions.  Figure 77 through Figure 80 show alternatives 2 through 5 to give a general location of treatments. Appendix C of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) provides greater overlaying proposed treatments with aquatic species habitat including mapped boreal toad habitat.  Key comparison elements for evaluating how the alternatives affect sensitive and management indicator species are:  • Bonneville cutthroat trout, resident trout, and aquatic macroinvertebrates – measures: increase of sediment in streams (number of tons of sediment per acre added to streams), biomass of trout per acre, and aquatic macroinvertebrate BCI rating.  • Boreal toad – sedimentation of breeding sites, percent area disturbance within RHCAs, road increases within RHCAs.  Other aquatic resources –  • Lake habitat – sediment influx into the lake, nutrient levels (phosphorus and nitrogen).  The figures listed in Table 107 are listed as mechanical treatment acres, percent HUC mechanical treatment, fire acres, fire acres adjusted for a maximum 60 percent treatment level, percent HUC fire treatment (at 60 percent), total percent HUC treatment methods. Note: Table 107 shows slightly fewer treatments acres than some tables in the rest of this document, or other project file documents that use official NHD layer HUC6 boundaries, as 159 acres of proposed prescribed fire treatments in the NHD Monroe Creek HUC6 are excluded from the modified Monroe Creek boundary shown below, as they do not drain into aquatic supporting drainages. These acres outside of modified HUC boundaries are evident on Figure 77 through Figure 79. 3.4.8.2 General Fire and Mechanical Treatment Aquatic Effects Discussion The following discussion points describe important general concepts regarding key aquatic habitat features, potential fire effects, and measures to protect those habitats:  Buffer Zones  Belt et al. (1992, 3:2) note that riparian buffer strips provide three basic roles: 1) they maintain the hydrologic, hydraulic, and ecological integrity of the stream channel, soil, and vegetation, 2) they filter and trap nutrients and sediments, and 3) they provide food, cover, and thermal protection to fish and wildlife. See Belt et al. (1992 5:6) for discussion on the role of buffer zones in managing cumulative effects to riparian areas.  Sediment  Duffield (no date) reviews the potential effects of sediment on fisheries. As summarized by Duffield (no date, page 1) fine sediment can suffocate trout eggs incubating in gravels, reduce macroinvertebrate biomass and diversity, and fill interstitial gravel spaces important for some life stages of trout and fill pools important for adult trout. Many studies have documented the reduced survival to emergence of trout eggs as fine sediment levels increase. At high enough No Action HUC 6 HUC 6 Total Acres Acres Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Mechanical & Slash Burning (Acres) Mechanical & Slash Burning Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities (Acres) Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of Acres Get Treated Prescribed Fire Mixed Burn Severities Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated All Treatments Combined Percent of HUC 6 Being Treated Box Creek - Above Reservoirs 8,470 0 686 8% 904 542 6% 15% 734 9% 8 96 5 38 6% 15% 7 37 9% 893 536 6% 15% 725 9% 796 478 6% 14% Box Creek - Below Reservoirs 11,214 0 1,808 16% 445 267 2% 19% 2,098 19% 501 0% 19% 2,250 20% 501 301 3% 23% 1,974 18% 276 166 1% 19% Browns Canyon-Otter Creek 17,857 0 2 0% 422 253 1% 1% - 0% 424 254 1% 1% - 0% 424 254 1% 1% 3 0% 420 252 1% 1% Dry Canyon 59,521 0 72 0% 3,217 1,930 3% 3% 3 56 1% 3,031 1,819 3% 4% 7 54 1% 2,745 1,647 3% 4% 428 1% 2,959 1,775 3% 4% Dry Canyon - Hunts Lake 241 0 - 0% 116 7 0 29% 29% - 0% 1 16 0% 0% - 0% 116 70 29% 29% 0 0% 116 70 29% 29% Dry Creek - Lower 2,980 0 - 0% 209 125 4% 4% - 0% 209 1 25 4% 4% - 0% 209 125 4% 4% 0 0% 209 125 4% 4% Dry Creek - Upper 9,510 0 417 4% 3,007 1,804 19% 23% 951 10% 3,153 0% 10% 1,254 13% 3,153 1,892 20% 33% 1,204 13% 2,213 1,328 14% 27% Gold Creek-Sevier River 29,011 0 - 0% 830 498 2% 2% - 0% 8 30 4 98 2% 2% 1 0% 8 29 497 2% 2% 0 0% 830 498 2% 2% Greenwich Creek 11,922 0 1,721 14% 199 119 1% 15% 1,822 15% 1 95 117 1% 16% 1,864 16% 194 116 1% 17% 1,720 14% 195 117 1% 15% Koosharem Creek-Otter Creek 3,715 0 43 1% 582 349 9% 11% 69 2% 585 3 51 9% 11% 2 38 6% 508 305 8% 15% 39 1% 585 351 9% 10% Manning Creek - Barney Lake 283 0 - 0% 202 121 43% 43% 81 29% 121 73 26% 54% 130 46% 72 43 15% 61% 133 47% 70 42 15% 62% Manning Creek - Lower 7,857 0 - 0% 191 115 1% 1% - 0% 191 1 15 1% 1% - 0% 1 91 115 1% 1% 4 0% 191 115 1% 2% Manning Creek - Manning Reservoir 1,189 0 34 3% 367 220 19% 21% 190 16% 276 166 14% 30% 4 31 36% 41 25 2% 38% 281 24% 185 111 9% 33% Manning Creek - Upper 14,855 0 3 64 2% 3,704 2,222 15% 17% 7 40 5% 3,795 2,277 15% 20% 1,298 9% 3,553 2,132 14% 23% 1,188 8% 2,878 1,727 12% 20% Maple Creek-Sevier River 28,346 0 - 0% 316 190 1% 1% - 0% 316 1 90 1% 1% 9 0% 3 08 1 85 1% 1% 0 0% 316 190 1% 1% Mill Creek 11,800 0 225 2% 1,500 900 8% 10% 5 83 5% 1,255 753 6% 11% 869 7% 1,112 6 67 6% 13% 470 4% 1,255 753 6% 10% Monroe Creek 23,532 0 997 4% 9,017 5,410 23% 27% 2,297 10% 8,680 5,208 22% 32% 4,363 19% 7,190 4,314 18% 37% 3,150 13% 7,041 4,225 18% 31% Monroe Creek - Magleby 1,667 0 85 5% 4 13 248 15% 20% 3 30 20% 168 101 6% 26% 449 27% 49 29 2% 29% 330 20% 168 101 6% 26% Peterson Creek 31,202 0 12 0% 499 299 1% 1% 1 18 0% 392 235 1% 1% 266 1% 2 44 146 0% 1% 118 0% 392 235 1% 1% Pine Canyon-Otter Creek 18,464 0 - 0% 405 243 1% 1% - 0% 405 243 1% 1% - 0% 4 05 2 43 1% 1% 0 0% 405 243 1% 1% Pole Canyon-Otter Creek 26,120 0 1 0% 18 11 0% 0% 16 0% 18 11 0% 0% 16 0% 18 11 0% 0% 2 0% 16 10 0% 0% Swift Spring Creek 22,852 0 41 0% 738 443 2% 2% 40 0% 779 467 2% 2% 40 0% 7 79 4 67 2% 2% 113 0% 666 400 2% 2% Thompson Creek-Sevier River 12,681 0 - 0% 2,276 1,366 11% 11% 8 0% 2,267 1,360 11% 11% 346 3% 1,930 1,158 9% 12% 8 0% 2,267 1,360 11% 11% Thompson Creek-Sevier River - Annabella Reservoir 940 0 48 5% 626 376 40% 45% 217 23% 457 274 29% 52% 507 54% 167 1 00 11% 65% 223 24% 450 270 29% 52% Water Creek 29,962 0 1,106 4% 1,903 1 ,142 4% 8% 2,250 8% 1,573 944 3% 11% 3,168 11% 1,175 705 2% 13% 1,802 6% 1,201 721 2% 8% Water Creek - Big Lake 3,409 0 525 15% 726 436 13% 28% 743 22% 562 337 10% 32% 845 25% 4 70 2 82 8% 33% 1,159 34% 91 55 2% 36% Grand Total 389,600 8,187 32,832 19,699 13,643 31,195 16,455 1 9,835 27,276 1 6,366 15,074 26,191 15,715 Alternative 2 Alternative 3 Alternative 4 Alternative 5 Table 107. Proposed fire and mechanical vegetation treatments by subwatershed (modified HUC6 and HUC7s used for aquatic analysis) by alternative. Figure 77. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 2  Figure 78. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watershed, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 3 Figure 79. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 4  Figure 80. Map showing landscape scale view of Monroe Mountain watersheds, past treatments and fires, and proposed treatments in alternative 5  levels (greater than 40 percent), fine sediment can even eliminate trout fisheries. Duffield (no date, page 3) notes that when evaluating sediment influx, channel morphology, historic sediment levels, and timing are important considerations, and even relatively low incremental sediment may have adverse impacts.  On the Monongahela National Forest, Duffield (no date, page 4 and 7) found a moderate inverse correlation between the percent fines in spawning gravels and biomass of fish in “B” channel types, and a highly significant inverse correlation between age 1 fish and sediment in “B” channel types, showing that in these moderate gradient stream channel types increasing sediment levels do have an effect on trout populations. Correlations were weaker in “A” and “G” channel types.  Belt et al. (1992, 2:3 and 5:3) note 4 factors to consider regarding buffer zone trapping of sediments: 1) buffer strips need to be wider on steeper slopes; 2) buffer strips are not effective in stopping sediment moving in channels (which can travel up to 1000 feet or more) [emphasis added the Forest’s fisheries biologist]; 3) overland sediment flow can move up to 300 feet through buffer zones in worst case scenarios; and 4) removing natural obstructions including vegetation within the buffer increases the distance sediment can flow. Mitigation measures to control sediment such as windrows at the base of road fill slopes, treatment of fill slopes with plantings (grass) or mulch, and road surface treatments can considerably reduce sediment yields (Belt et al. 1992 5:2). Belt et al. (1992 5:2) summarize a number of studies, and while sediment travel distances varied, and were much less on low slopes, in general they note that filter strips of 200 to 300 feet are generally effective in controlling overland sediment transport.  Temperature  Stream temperatures are a factor of concern for salmonids, and not just in the relatively arid and warm environments of the Western United States. According to Teti (2003, page 1) stream temperature is of concern even in British Columbia, and sockeye salmon have been reported to lose weight above 17 degrees Celsius, indicating stress. Monitoring of stream temperatures on the Forest since 2001 has found peak summer temperatures to be of concern on several streams (unpublished Fishlake National Forest file data). Experience sampling trout on the Forest since 2001, particularly in the hotter and dryer summers of 2002 and 2003, has shown that trout in water 20 degrees Celsius, or higher are clearly stressed and much more vulnerable during electroshocking sampling work. These high peak water temperatures have been correlated with low fish numbers during sampling on Upper Manning Creek (Hepworth et al. 2010).  One interesting item noted in several years of monitoring temperature on the Forest is how rarely single point in time temperature readings document stream temperature problems when they do occur. Usually it requires data logging continuous sampling over the summer to identify the problem. In low elevation warmer areas and high elevation low flow streams it is highly likely that temperature would be a concern on these creeks if the currently canopy layer was removed. Therefore, to maintain the fisheries in the project area streams and prevent habitat quality degradation, maintaining a high proportion of streamside shade would be very important.  Rip_buffer_microclimate_effects  Figure 81. Riparian buffer effects on microclimate (from FEMAT 1993, Chapter 5)  Figure 81 shows the role riparian forests play in modifying the climate near streams. The graph shows the effect by distance based on tree heights. For the project area tree height potential is about 100 feet, so the 100-foot special management zone would be equal to the one (tree height) on the graph. This shows that the 100-foot buffer would be highly effective at reducing radiation to the stream and reducing air temperatures in the stream corridor.  Studies reviewed by Belt et al. (1992, 4:1 and 5:4) indicate that loss of riparian vegetation results in larger daily temperature variations and elevated monthly temperature during summer periods when stream flow is low and air temperature high. Removal of riparian vegetation can also reduce winter water temperature. Conversely, other studies reviewed by Belt et al. (1992, 5:4) showed that riparian buffer strips were effective in preventing stream temperature increases in clear-cut areas. Stream morphology can affect the streams sensitivity to changes; shallow streams will tend to heat and cool more rapidly (Teti 2003 page 4).  Nutrients  According to Belt et al. (1992, 2:3), effectiveness of buffer strips as nutrient filters has not been examined extensively in scientific literature. Slash burning within a buffer strip can increase nutrients supplied to streams. Belt et al. (1992, 4:3) also reviewed one study that showed some effects of slash burning could be reduced by passage through the riparian buffer. Thus, the effects of slash burning could vary widely from beneficial to harmful depending on the background nutrient level in the soil and water, amount of material burned, buffer zone distance between the burned material and the creek, and weather. Belt et al. (1992, 5:4) note the studies they reviewed “suggest that where nutrient loading is a problem, burning slash within the buffer is likely to increase the loading and the problem”. These studies on slash burning indicate buffer zones likely also reduce nutrient spikes from upland prescribed burning.  Rip_buffer_stream_effects2 Figure 82. Riparian forest effects on streams (from FEMAT 1993 Chapter 5)  Figure 82 shows that a buffer width of about 1 tree height, or about 100 feet for this project area out from the stream on each side will provide nearly 100 percent effectiveness for shading and maintaining coarse woody debris to the stream.  Water chemistry samples taken on North Fork of North Creek in October 2010 showed a considerable spike in phosphorus after the Oldroyd burn, despite the fact that that the sample was not timed in order to hit expected peak levels (Whelan 2003). This could indicate the prescribed burn treatments and wildfires could lead to large nutrient pulses moving down streams. These would likely be of small consequence in stream systems, but could be important if draining into the fish supporting water reservoirs on Monroe Mountain, which are already nutrient laden. 3.4.8.3 General Discussion on Proposed Mechanical Vegetation Treatment Effects Mechanical treatments proposed under the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project range from fairly low impact to fairly high impact. One level of proposed treatment would remove all existing conifers from aspen stands with only minor aspen removal as necessary to reach conifers. In some cases, this work could even be done by hand. This work would have less benefit in stimulating aspen to sprout and my only “buy time” by setting back conifer invasion, but it also would not “bet the stand” where regeneration would have to be successful or the stand would be lost, such as those that happened in the Dry Creek and While Ledges area. It would also have very minimal effects to watershed function. Outside of the risks of motorized use (which should mostly be mitigated by design features), these treatments would not have measurable effects to aquatic resources.  A variation of this proposal is to thin smaller conifers up to an 8-inch DBH size, leaving the larger trees. In areas where conifer invasion was just starting, it could increase habitat diversity. In areas where conifer invasion is well established, it may be much less effective due to leaving seed sources in the stand. It would have similar or even less effects than above.  The other proposal is thinning stands to a basal area of 90. This is more of a classical thinning timber harvest. As noted above, the timber stand provides important functions along streams for nutrient and sediment trapping and microsite conditions. Design features should maintain most of these riparian values. The major risk of effects from this harvest to aquatic resources results from disturbances related to roads and mechanical skidding. Roads change delivery networks, increase disturbed ground, and increase sedimentation and peak flows to streams. Skidding effects can vary from relatively minor to problematic depending on its implementation. At its best, it should disturb less than 15 percent of the ground surface (D. Deiter, former Fishlake National Forest hydrologist (currently the District Ranger on the Jackson Ranger District, Bridger-Teton National Forest, personal communication)), but can range much higher. Past watershed monitoring of Monroe Mountain timber harvests found much higher skidding ground disturbance (Deiter 2002) at levels that would likely contribute sediment to nearby streams. The Intermountain Region should be less than 15 percent following completion of a management action (USFS 2011). 3.4.8.4 General Discussion on Effects to Aquatic Macroinvertebrates Under the no action alternative, there would be no mechanical vegetative or prescribed fire treatments, so no direct adverse effects would be expected to the streams aquatic macroinvertebrates. Potential indirect effects would come from natural succession as the areas further move to late seral communities with secondary effects to watershed health and increasing risks of catastrophic wildfire.  Wildfires may be more likely to have a negative effect on stream water quality (depending when and where it burned) under the no action alternative, as it would likely occur in the summer months when control efforts are more difficult and the acreage burned would probably be greater. This would result in potentially more sediment moving into the streams following a precipitation event than from a planned prescribed burn. Wildfires also have the potential for larger size than the proposed treatments, which would increase the total amount of sediment potentially delivered to the streams. These high rates of sediment could cover gravels and may adversely affect localized populations or viability of aquatic macroinvertebrates.  Under the action alternatives, some impacts would likely occur to aquatic macroinvertebrates from proposed mechanical vegetation and prescribed fire treatments. There are several potential effects to aquatic habitats and associated aquatic macroinvertebrates that can result from timber harvest. These include increased solar radiation, decreased supply of large woody debris, erosion of streambanks, addition of logging slash, altered streamflow regime, accelerated surface erosion, increased nutrient runoff, and inputs of fine inorganic and organic matter.  Wildfire and prescribed fire can affect aquatic macroinvertebrates. Direct effects include heating or abrupt changes in water chemistry. Indirect effects (impacts that are not directly connected in space and time) include changes to the hydrologic regime, erosion, debris flows, woody debris, and riparian cover. The primary potential for indirectly affecting aquatic macroinvertebrates would be from the introduction of fine sediment to the streams. Fine sediment can change the species composition, diversity, and abundance of macroinvertebrates (Robertson 1997a). All of these effects are dependent on numerous factors including fire intensity, its extent and location within a watershed, the amount and type of fuel consumed and left, soil type, soil fire temperatures, fire severities, and the frequency, timing, and intensity of precipitation events (Robertson 1997b). The results would be include increased solar radiation, erosion of streambanks, altered streamflow regime, accelerated surface erosion, increased nutrient runoff, and inputs of fine inorganic and organic matter. The use of design features, mitigation measures, best management practices, and following the soil and water conservation handbook reduces the amount of sediment reaching the stream.  The activities associated with this project are relatively low risk for AIS transfer. Thus, the design feature of following Regional Operational and Technical guidelines for AIS (USFS 2014a and 2014d) would provide adequate protection.  Effects to aquatic macroinvertebrates are a compilation of the suite of factors mentioned above, including shading (probably mostly related to photosynthesis), organic debris (fine and course) for allochthonous food, sediment (which covers gravels and cobbles favored by clean water taxa important for fish food), and nutrients (both from sediment and ash from burning). It is likely that treatments of the units within trout supporting habitat will lead to localized to multi-reach scale delivery of sediment in the short to moderate-term. This would decrease habitat quality for clean water taxa macroinvertebrates in the short to moderate term.  Riparian vegetation is an important factor of aquatic biological productivity both by its input of terrestrial organic matter and by shading, which limits production by aquatic plants (Belt et al. 1992, 4:1). Belt et al. (1992, 2:4 and 5:6) found a fair number of studies that document effects on aquatic food webs between harvest with or without buffer strips, but limited information on predicting effects from differing types of buffer strips. These studies indicate that a 98-foot buffer strip is adequate to maintain macroinvertebrate diversity at pre-harvest levels, where a 33- foot buffer strip is inadequate (Belt et al. 1992, 2:4 and 5:6). Streams without buffer zones showed increased sediment and decreased benthic invertebrate fauna (both diversity and density). Diversity increased over a 6-year period following treatment, but had not fully recovered. While these studies were focused on effects of timber harvest, they indicate that riparian buffer strips will help limit impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrates from upland mechanical vegetation and prescribed fire treatments.  McGurk and Fong (1995) used a modified ERA technique to compare disturbance along streams and their effects to aquatic macroinvertebrates. Their modification to the ERA method (discussed below) was to only include treatments and roads within “streamside impact zones” that went out 100 meters from streams. They found impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrate indices began at a 5 percent disturbance level (ERA) within these zones. The design features for this project include one limiting treatments to 5 to 10 percent of the riparian area within a HUC6 subwatershed at one time. Based on McGurk and Fong (1995), this will result in some short to moderate term impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrates. The design features slight increase in treatment area over McGurk and Fong’s (1995) threshold was made considering the tradeoffs of increased treatment efficiency and that the larger areas may help overcome ungulate browsing pressures. This level of treatment is still only a small portion of the total riparian area. 3.4.8.5 Specific Effect Predictions There are many applicable methods to analyze and disclose the potential effects of the proposed actions under the various alternatives – mechanical vegetation treatments and prescribed fire - to aquatic resources. When looking at multiple aquatic species at a landscape level across a small mountain range, no one method is likely to capture all of the important considerations. Indeed, different methods may give different conclusions due to change in emphasis or perspective. For the purpose of this report, 9 different measures of potential effects were considered across 15 mapped HUCs (for some measures only 13 of the 15 are used), and 3 combined 6th field HUCs (that include 2 or more of the 15). In order to simplify this symphony of information, a synthesis of the results was developed for seven of these measures. This synthesis ranks the relative effects of the various alternatives, and a summary ranking of the alternatives for each HUC is also included. The nine specific areas looked at are: tiering to the hydrological/soils specialist report (Solt 2015; appendix J in this EIS), which included a table of relative impacts based on professional opinion of the Forest hydrologist; comparison to fire effects from empirical data of other southern Utah fires; debris flow potential (not ranked); mass wasting potential (not ranked); a watershed analysis tool called equivalent area modeling (ERA); a spatial review of the alternative actions in each HUC summarized by the professional opinion of the Forest fisheries biologist; consistency with Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) habitat management guidelines; percent area of mapped boreal toad habitat proposed for treatment; and percent increase in motorized route density in mapped boreal toad habitat.  Hydrologic and Sedimentation Modeling  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS)) prepared the hydrology/soils specialist report for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) provides background information on the proposed action, design features, and background information on Monroe Mountain, much of which was incorporated into this report. The hydrology/soils specialist also provides information on aquatic resources (streams and lakes), riparian areas, groundwater, and water quality. As noted in Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS), two Monroe Mountain water bodies are on the 2010 approved 303d list – Manning Meadow Reservoir (dissolved oxygen and total phosphorous for Cold Water Aquatic Use) and lower Box Creek Reservoir (pH for Cold Water Aquatic Use).  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) has a good summary of soils and erosion processes (stream and upland) that this report tiers to for its effect analysis.  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) conducted Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) modeling for representative treatments in the Box Creek and Manning Creek drainages (see Table 104). This modeling found a relatively low probability of erosion for skid trails and mechanical treatments, a low to moderate probability of erosion from low intensity fire, and a 100 percent probability of erosion for high intensity fire. These results translated to a low probability of sediment delivery for mechanical treatments, low intensity fire, and a low to moderate probability of sediment delivery for high intensity fire.  Monitoring of past timber sales on Monroe Mountain identified implementation issues that likely resulted in actual sediment delivery much higher than the predictions for this project. Deiter (2002) documents monitoring of three Monroe Mountain timber sales in 2001. In the White Pine Creek area, Deiter (2002) documented a unit boundary only 75 feet from a perennial stream (this boundary was corrected by the forester before harvest after being made aware of the issue) and considerable surface erosion from overland flows. In the Annabella area, Deiter (2002) documented a very high level of surface disturbance from soil compaction, displacement, and rutting from skidding with no designated trail network, which was further increased by dozer slash piling. A skid trail was found on a slope greater than 40 percent. In the Mill Creek area Deiter (2002) documented heavy cutting under an intermediate harvest prescription that had subsequent blowdown, substantial overland erosion, no special protection in the harvest along intermittent and ephemeral channels - with harvest up to the channel, skidding of logs down an ephemeral channel, and removal of wood needed to stabilize elevations in intermittent channels [note that there is no protection built into the LRMP for intermittent channels]. There were numerous road issues in these three areas as well. Deiter (2002) recommended no harvest or skidding within the inner-gorge of perennial channels, some protection for all channels of the defined channel network including intermittent or ephemeral channels, limiting skidding to a designated network unless on a slash mat, 18 inches of snow, or frozen ground, grapple piling, assessment of [salmon blade] scarification needs and better following of road best management practices. [Note that the Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) model has a fairly high coefficient for timber harvest that likely represents conditions generally found on typical timber sales. Solt’s (2015; appendix J in this EIS) values likely represent a minimum level of erosion and sedimentation that could be obtained under ideal circumstances. Proper administration of all project actions (mechanical timber management and burning) is essential for obtaining predicted results.]  It is important to note that due to the many assumptions and uncertainties inherent in models absolute numbers should be treated with caution. Predicted model results may be plus or minus 50 percent of true values and erosion rates are highly variable. Erosion after fires can range from 0.4 to 2.6 tons per acre per year from prescribed fires up to 9 to 49 tons per acre per year after wildfires. Erosion rates and sedimentation normally decline for several years until returning to normal background rates. In all cases, these effects would be considered higher than the background level of the no action alternative, but they would be smaller in magnitude then the effects from a large high intensity wildfire.  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) notes several drainages of concern given the proposed action. Summarizing from Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) but in the HUC order discussed in this document they are:  • Dry Creek is a concern due to area proposed for treatment. Canyon bottom could be subject to flooding.  • Manning Creek should be treated over multiple entries, as channel conditions for the “uber-important” BVCT fishery, and preventing larger floods should be a factor of consideration for area treatment size for each entry. Treatment will help reduce longterm fire risk, so implementation is a “balancing act between water quality and watershed restoration”.  • Dry Canyon is debris flow prone (values at risk below Forest) and should likely be treated over multiple entries.  • Monroe Creek – extensive areas proposed for treatment. High values at risk downstream. Maintaining channel access to floodplains and hydrologic function is very important.  • Thompson Creek – large areas proposed for treatment. Highly debris flow prone. “Great care should be taken to limit flooding and debris-flow events. Large storms are frequent. “…flooding and debris could go anywhere below or on the [alluvial] fan”.  • Water Creek – potential to affect downstream diversions and irrigation water and add sediment to Big Lake.  • Mill Creek – high downstream values below the Forest that could be at risk.  • Koosharem Creek – diversions and high downstream values. Cumulative effects concern – “When this project is added to the Monument Peak Project then about 70 percent of the drainage will be treated and with values downstream…great care should be taken to prevent large floods downstream”.  • Greenwich Creek – somewhat less concern but still greater than15 percent treatment and a diversion potentially at risk.  • Box Creek – Cumulative affects concern with areas proposed for treatment added to past treatments. “Cumulative effects wise this should be treated with care and potential over multiple entries.”  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) notes that the project design features will aid in the trapping of sediment and nutrients (see buffer discussion above) and are a factor in the relatively low probability of sediment reaching the stream from mechanical treatments and low intensity fire in his WEPP modeling.  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) notes some concerns from overlap of currently approved but not yet implemented work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain/North Clover projects. Since acreage figures for these projects by HUC were not provided in GIS data for the fisheries analysis, it is likely that the ERA modeling conducted below understates impacts to Big Lake, Koosharem Creek, and Box Creek. It is difficult to predict effects for two potential projects in the same area with different and unknown timelines. The potential for increased impacts in these drainages should be kept in mind.  One difficulty in assessing impacts of this project are that actual effects will depend on project administration and implementation, scale – how much is treated at one time, fire severities and relative ground disturbance during mechanical treatments, post-treatment weather, post-treatment land use. Overlaid on this is the potential over the project implementation timeline of 10 years the risk of wildfire, which could range from no impacts to impacts considerably outside the realm produced by the proposed actions. These items are probably factors that lead both the aquatics portion of this report and Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) to have somewhat varying interpretations. Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) notes in several areas that there will likely be negative effects to stream channels and floodplains from increased floods generated from fire activities. These effects would decrease as time passes, and may be less from prescribed fire activities than wildfires (2015; appendix J in this EIS – see comment in empirical fire section below, however).  With regard to design features, Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) writes, “Riparian buffers, Mitigation Measures, BMPs will not likely protect all riparian functions during vegetation treatments. However, they will be aid in the protection of riparian areas and maintaining water quality.” Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) describes that local impacts “might be dramatic” but at the “landscape level are not expected to lead to drastic loss of riparian vegetation or function”. This is consistent with the fisheries biologist view that design features and BMPs minimize impacts but do not fully offset them. Interpreted by the Forest’s fisheries biologist, Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) implies that fairly large reach scale impacts are likely, while at the overall drainage level and across the mountain range, watershed function will only slightly or moderately be affected. This should maintain large scale resources like fish populations in long streams, but could be important to key localized aquatic assets like important boreal toad breeding sites and hibernacula, trout broodstocks, and high value recreational lake fisheries.  Unfortunately, there are not any current fish modeling techniques to predict where aquatic biota thresholds are in relation to the predicted increases of sediment probability delivery modeled. In addition, the model does not account for potential of mass wasting events or delivery by small ephemeral drainage channels. Professional opinion of the Forest’s fisheries biologist is that very short-lived (1 to 3 years) and localized reach scale effects would be likely at the level of low intensity fire modeling. With the high intensity fire modeling, burning of the proposed units would likely result in mid-term reach scale effects. In contrast, in a severe wildfire that had large areas of moderate to high burn severities, effects could be long-term (greater than 5 years) and affect multiple reaches or even overall population persistence. Similar effects could occur if burning triggered a debris flow (see below).  Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) developed a table ranking of alternative effects (Table 7 from Solt 2015; appendix J in this EIS). Based on his professional experience and WEPP modeling, Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS) generally favored mechanical treatment over fire in his ranking. For this report, Table 7 from Solt 2015; appendix J in this EIS has been reformatted to be consistent with other tables in this document and is shown as Table 108 below.    Table 108. Hydrological disturbance rating developed from Solt 2015 (appendix J in this EIS). Note: Alternatives ranked 1 through 5 with 1 being least impacts, 5 greatest. Solt 2015 (appendix J in this EIS) did not include the no action alternative in the table; it was added to Table 9 and Tables K-1 and K-2 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) for the synthesis for consistence with other tables in the report.  HUC No Act Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5         Dry Creek – Upper 1 3 4 5 2  Manning Creek – Upper 1 3 4 5 2  MC – Barney Lake 1 5 4 2 3  MC – Manning Reservoir 1 2 2 2 2  MC – HUC 6 combined       Dry Canyon – Hunts Lake 1 2 2 2 2  Monroe Creek 1 3 4 5 2  Monroe Creek-Magleby 1 4 2 3 2  Monroe Creek-combined       Thompson Creek 1 3 3 2 3  TC-Annabella Reservoir 1 4 3 2 3  Water Creek 1 5 4 3 2  WC – Big Lake 1 4 4 2 3  Koosharem Creek 1 3 5 4 2  Greenwich Creek 1 2 3 4 2  Box Creek ab. Reservoir.** 1 2 2 2 2  Box Creek below Reservoir. 1 3 4 2 5  Box Creek - combined       Empirical Data from Past Southern Utah Fires  In the late 1990s, the Forest’s fisheries biologist researched fire effects on isolated streams for an environmental analysis for managed wildfire on the Snake Range in eastern Nevada. Fire effects to Apache and Gila trout and non-native trout species in Arizona and New Mexico were reviewed. Where the fire (size and soil severities) descriptions were limited in the journal articles, the authors were contacted for further information. Ultimately, the districts and units where the fires occurred were contacted to discuss the percent of watershed burned and their burn severities. Effects from these fires were much more severe than those found in central Idaho with large connected stream networks and mobile fish populations. From this a general rule of thumb was developed for the environmental assessment project area based on these southwestern United States fires that burning over 15 percent of the watershed (uplands only, well dispersed) at moderate to high severities would likely result in population scale impacts to a trout population and burning over 50 percent of the watershed with moderate and high severities would likely result in extirpation of the trout population. These fires were in harsher fisheries conditions then typically found on the Forest, but are more likely applicable to south central Utah then the central Idaho fire research. Changes in long-term weather patterns also seem to be making Forest situations more like those experienced in the southwestern United States in the past.  Empirical data from wildfires and prescribed fires from southern Utah has provided an opportunity to check the above figures and provides another method to judge potential effects from this proposed project. The majority of fires on the Forest are located far enough from streams and are small enough that no deleterious effects are even noted to aquatic biota. For example, a wildfire burned the north side the canyon above lower Chalk Creek in the Pahvant Range in 2005, yet monitoring in 2006 showed the biomass at the lower station had increased (probably due to better stream water flow conditions in 2005). Some fires have had greater effects, however. The effects to trout of well documented/studied fires on the Fishlake and Dixie National Forests (excluding the Pine Valley mountains) from 2000 to 2010 are described below, in general order of increasing impacts.  Prescribed burning was conducted in Pine Creek above Sulphurdale in 2004. Approximately 12 percent of the watershed was burned in a spread out mosaic fashion. Most of the burning was away from the creek at low to moderate severities, although about 0.33 mile of creek was affected by moderate severity riparian burning. Overall, the fish biomass increased relative to the 2001 data when the seven fish population stations were re-monitored in 2005. Only the lower station directly below the burned riparian area decreased, and vegetation was resprouting vigorously in the burned stream bottom. Improved water flows in 2005 and resting the stream from livestock grazing apparently offset any negative effects from the burning, which were minimal (unpublished Fishlake National Forest files).  In contrast, a prescribed fire on Shingle Creek in 2002 burned about 0.5 mile of stream bottom in a high intensity burn resulting in high fire soil severities in the riparian area. Fish were absent from the burned area for several weeks following the fire, and monitoring found about 80 percent fewer fish in the burned area for 2 years following the fire (unpublished data in FNF SO files). Fish numbers returned to near normal levels 5 years following the burn, but a heavy infestation of cheatgrass invaded upper streambanks and stream terraces, likely increasing future fire risk to the stream and sediment erosion from upper banks into the stream.  The 2002 Sanford fire caused fish kills in three tributary streams of the East Fork of the Sevier River and in one tributary stream of the upper Sevier River. The fish kill actually extended downstream into the East Fork of the Sevier River, resulting in the elimination of trout in 37 miles of streams by UDWR estimates. Sanford Creek, the tributary on the west side draining into the upper Sevier River, was least affected. It had only 3 percent of the watershed receiving high severity burn, with 27 percent of the watershed moderate severity, and 6 percent low severity. The fish in this drainage survived the initial fire and over the first winter, but were eliminated by flooding off the burned areas during the second summer. Sanford Creek was a naturally marginal stream due to low stream flows, but had beaver ponds, which provided good fish habitat in some stream reaches.  Deer Creek, one of the three tributaries on the East Fork of the Sevier River, had the next highest burn percentages. It had high severity fire on 10 percent of the sub-watershed, 27 percent moderate severity, and 3 percent low severity. The trout population was extirpated from Deer Creek, but it has been making good habitat recovery since the fire. Deer Creek was reinvaded by non-native trout from the East Fork of the Sevier River. Following construction of fish barriers, it was treated for reintroduction of native BVCT.  Cottonwood Creek, also on the East Fork of the Sevier River, had 6 percent high severity, 39 percent moderate severity, and 5 percent low severity burn within its sub-watershed. Trout were also extirpated in this watershed.  Deep Creek was the most severely burned of the three tributary creeks on the East Fork of the Sevier River. It had over 60 percent of the sub-watershed burned. The high severity burn covered 23 percent of the watershed, 33 percent was moderate severity, and 5 percent low severity. Sampling within a week of the fire found no fish surviving within the portion of the stream that was burned over. Estimates were that only about 350 pure native BVCT survived the fire, all on Bureau of Land Management administered lands below the fire. This was a unique genetic stock that had not been replicated in any other streams. Fortunately, one stream had been treated to remove non-native trout with the intent of moving fish from Deep Creek to it in the fall. About 225 BVCT were rescued and transplanted to this stream within a few weeks of the fire. The remaining few fish were extirpated when a storm and flood occurred just a few weeks later. Effects to Deep Creek habitat have been severe, with many areas of aggradation resulting in limited channel and subsurface flow, but also severe downcutting in places to bedrock and flash flood events with debris flows. The Deep Creek watershed has been slow to stabilize, and flooding in 2005 wiped out a small number of trout, which were reintroduced into the watershed in July 2005. By 2009, the stream has recovered enough to support and carry over trout and BVCT have been reintroduced into the watershed (Hadley et al. 2010).  In 2010 the Twitchell Canyon fire was allowed to burn for 119 days following a natural ignition by lightning in the Indian Creek watershed. Over this time, about 54,000 acres were burned in a nearly even mix of 0.33 percent low severity, 0.33 percent moderate severity, and 0.33 percent high severity. Four HUC6 watersheds were burned over 30 percent of moderate to high severity, with even higher percentages in some tributaries.  Indian Creek had 38 percent burned at moderate to high severity but a large part of the upper watershed was moderate severity night underburns (human ignitions) in stands with an aspen component that actively sprouted, lessening fire effects. Late season lower watersheds were more severely burned. Thus fish survival was fairly good in the upper watershed with some habitat effects, while fish in the lower watershed were extirpated from events from tributary drainages, even as late as 2013 (Fishlake National Forest file data).  North Fork of North Creek had 38 percent burned in moderate to high severity, with the Pole Creek tributary burned 54 percent moderate (mostly) to high severity. Fish had survived in this drainage until treatment with rotenone in 2014, but fish were generally extirpated below the Pole Creek confluence by severe flooding out of this drainage. Initial flooding in lower north fork of North Creek was estimated at 300 cfs by the local Watermaster and 500 cfs by Forest personnel (Photo 7). Debris flows from small tributary face drainages in the upper watershed have had a pronounced effect on the pure remnant BVCT in the headwaters. Some headwaters BVCT were salvaged in 2013 and moved to South Fork of North Creek and low numbers persisted in 2014. (Fishlake National Forest file data).  Shingle Creek was burned at 42 percent moderate to high severity. Fire effects have been especially severe in this drainage. Flooding one year after the fire was sufficient to destroy a concrete block fish barrier and left most of the middle drainage completely turned over without a single living riparian plant for extensive distances (Photo 8 and Photo 9). These severe effects have continued 4 years post-fire, with extensive habitat turnover. Much of the middle drainage looks almost the same in late summer 2014 as it did immediately following the August 2011 flood. Extensive habitat work to incorporate wood back into the riparian zone was just completed in much of Shingle Creek in August 2014 using large trackhoes. Just weeks after completion of this work, the 2014 floods rearranged much of the wood placed into a series of small debris jams.  Fish Creek was burned at 47 percent moderate to high severity, with the tributaries Picnic, Line, and Trail Creek burned at even higher percentages. Upper Picnic Creek was not affected by the Twitchell Canyon fire, however, and East Fork of Fish Creek had a lower burn area percentage and large areas of low to moderate fire severities. Fish survived in both of these headwater areas. Downstream-burned areas have had extensive habitat damage from gravel bedload transport filling habitat features, but some fish have been found in sampling due to small numbers of fish moving in from unburned reaches (Hadley 2012).  These fires have been summarized in Table 109, below. The fires which led to trout populations being lost occurred in dry or hot summer and fall months (June through September excluding the wet monsoon season), and had at least 30 percent of the watershed burned or were associated with debris flow prone sub-watersheds (see below). The streams in the table below have been arranged by increasing percentage of the watershed burned in moderate to high severity to show the generally increasing progression of effects to aquatics as fire percentage increases.    Photo 7. Fishlake hydrological personnel show magnitude of August 2011 flood in lower North Fork of North Creek from mark on far bank, over the height of the hand raised at stream edge to the toe of the person in the foreground. Flood was estimated at 500 cfs and killed all the fish in these stream reaches.       Photo 8. Middle Shingle Creek after the August 2011 flood. All traces of riparian vegetation were removed by the flood. Only nine trout survived this flood above constructed fish barriers on mainstem Clear Creek just below the Shingle confluence. The surviving trout were in the mainstem channel above the confluence. Design feature incorporated into this project to limit 6th field HUC treatments to 15 percent of the area at one time will prevent floods of this magnitude, but there still could be some impacts from high percentage treatments at the 7th field HUC level.    Photo 9. The August 2011 flood out of Shingle Creek was large enough to destroy this concrete block fish barrier located just below the confluence with upper Clear Creek. One concrete block (2x2x4 foot) was found over 500 feet downstream.  Table 109. Fire Effects to Fisheries – S. Utah 2000-2014 (excludes Pine Valley Mountains). This table shows the percentage burned at the HUC-6 level, although the pour point used for the table might be slightly modified from the HUC boundary to the point of diversion or lower extent of the fish population. Percentage burn is for the modified boundary. Stream Total Watershed % M-H Severity Burned Fish Population Effects Channel Effects Fire/Year Pine Creek (Sul) 2% None known None known Twitchell/2010 Shingle Creek 2% (8% stream length) Reach scale decline Minimal Pres. Burn/2002 SF North Creek 8% Minimal – some below Pine Cr trib. Minimal – some below Pine Cr trib. Twitchell/2010 Oak Creek 12% Extirpated1 1 to 2 foot downcutting1 Devils Den/2006 Pine Creek (Sul) 12% Minimal None Pres. burn/2004 Mill Creek 19% Reach scale Minimal Twitchell/2010 Sanford Creek 30% (Majority at moderate) Extirpated - year 2 Minor Sanford/2002 Deer Creek 37% Extirpated Moderate Sanford/2002 Indian Creek 38% (upper watershed mostly moderate) Upper - declines, extirpated lower Upper minimal but inc. bedload, lower major Twitchell/2010 NF North Creek 38% Nearly extirpated lower, large declines middle, nearly extirpated upper remnant. Population continuing to decline 4 years post-fire Major – particularly below Pole Creek and upper headwaters due to bedload increase issues Twitchell/2010 Shingle Creek 41% Extirpated2 Severe – with new major channel changing events even 4 years post-fire Twitchell/2010 Cottonwood Creek 45% Extirpated Major Sanford/2002 Fish Creek avg. (inc. Tributaries) 47% Extirpated except in less burned East Fork headwaters Major esp. bedload issues Twitchell/2010 Trail Canyon (Fish Cr. Trib.) 53% Marginal fishery, Extirpated Major Twitchell/2010 Pole Creek (N. Fork North Cr. 54%3 Marginal fishery, Extirpated Major – bedload issues Twitchell/2010 Trib.) Deep Creek 56% Extirpated Extensive Sanford/2002 Picnic Creek (Fish Cr. Trib.) 59% Extirpated lower, good survival in unburned headwaters Major Twitchell/2010 Line Canyon (Fish Cr. Trib.) 83% Extirpated Major – extensive downcutting Twitchell/2010 1A debris flow prone subwatershed with about 90 percent moderate to high severity burn was located at the head of the Oak Creek fishery. A 25-year storm event in October following the fire generated a 100-year plus flood event with extensive sediment from the burned subwatershed, accounting for the serious effects despite a relatively low overall watershed percentage burned. 2Limited survival (9 trout) occurred in upper Clear Creek above its confluence with Shingle Creek below the fire. 3Majority of this figure (86 percent) is moderate severity.  The proposed action was analyzed by comparing the percentage of land proposed for treatment in each sub-watershed for each alternative to the past fire data shown in Table 109. The areas proposed for treatment are shown in Table 110 below. In addition to the HUC6 level, as looked at in Table 109, the percentages proposed for treatment were also looked at for several smaller HUC7 level subwatersheds. HUC scale is shown by the second column in Table 110. Note that actual on-the-ground impacts may be less than indicated by calculated percentage analysis shown in Table 110. This is because not all of the area may be treated at one time. Some treatment may be deferred at the HUC6 level as part of the design feature. If a unit contains both mechanical harvest and burning, they may occur in differing years. Treatment units within the subwatershed may be broken up for implementation and treated in different years. It is likely that most of the upland treatments will occur in a relatively compressed timeframe, however.  In general these figures show that M-H severity burned areas of less than 15 percent of a watershed area typically has reach scale, short-term impacts, between 15 to 30 percent of a watershed area typically has population scale, moderate-term impacts, and greater than 30 percent of a watershed area has the potential for population extirpation and long-term impacts. It is interesting that the 15 percent threshold where localized impacts transition to larger multireach population scale impacts mirrors the 15 percent Standard and Guideline for detrimentally disturbed soils in the Intermountain Region Forest Service Manual (USDA Forest Service 2011). Both moderate and high burn severity soils would be considered detrimentally disturbed.  The above description of effects was based only on burned areas. The proposed project includes large areas of both burning and mechanical treatments. For this portion of the analysis, they were considered equivalent with the understanding that the predicted effects would be high, since some of the mechanical treatments are relatively low effect and some areas would have low severity fire. [Since type of mechanical treatments was not mapped at the HUC scale, a more detailed analysis breaking mechanical treatments out by area could not be done]. Again, it is important to understand that not all of the treatment area would be detrimentally disturbed and areas of minimal soil disturbance and low severity fire would reduce the area contributing to watershed effects. The numbers in Table 110 and the summary in Appendix K-1 of Whelen 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) do show sub-watersheds with high treatment levels that warrant caution, however, and provide relative rankings for evaluation.  Table 110. Proposed treatment percentages by subwatershed summarized from Table 107.   Fire % / Mechanical % / Total % HUC Name HUC scale NoAct Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 19 / 4 / 23 0 / 10 / 10 20 / 13 / 33 14 / 13 / 27 Manning Cr – Upper Mod6- 0 / 0 / 0 15 / 2 / 17 15 / 5 / 20 14 / 9 / 23 12 / 8 /20 MC – Barney Lake 7 0 / 0 / 0 43 / 0 / 43 26 / 29 / 54 15 / 46 / 61 15 / 47 / 62 MC – Manning Res 7 0 / 0 / 0 19 / 3 / 21 14 / 16 / 30 2 / 36 / 38 9 / 24 / 33 MC – HUC 6 combined Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 16/2/18 15/6/22 14/11/25 12/10/21 Dry Can – Hunts Lk 8 0 / 0 / 0 29 / 0 / 29 29 / 0 / 29 29 / 0 / 29 29 / 0 / 29 Monroe Creek Mod6- 0 / 0 / 0 23 / 4 / 27 22 / 10 / 32 18 / 19 / 37 18 / 13 / 31 MonroeCr- Magleby 7 0 / 0 / 0 15 / 5 / 20 6 / 20 / 26 2 / 27 / 29 6 / 20 / 26 MonroeCrcombined Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 23/4/27 21/10/32 17/19/36 17/14/31 Thompson Creek 6 0 / 0 / 0 Not used due to HUC configuration TC-Annabella Res 7 0 / 0 / 0 40 / 5 / 45 29 / 23 / 52 11 / 54 / 65 29 / 24 / 52 Water Creek 6 0 / 0 / 0 Not used due to HUC configuration WC – Big Lake 7 0 / 0 / 0 13 / 15 / 28 10 / 22 / 32 8 / 25 / 33 2 / 34 / 36 Koosharem Creek Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 9 / 1 / 11 9 / 2 / 11 8 / 6 / 15 9 / 1 / 10 Greenwich Creek Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 1 / 14 / 15 1 / 15 / 16 1 / 16 / 17 1 / 14 / 15 Box Cr ab. Res.** 7 0 / 0 / 0 6 / 8 / 15 6 / 9 / 15 6 / 9 / 15 6 / 9 / 14 Box Cr below Res. Mod6- 0 / 0 / 0 2 / 16 / 19 0 / 19 / 19 3 / 20 / 23 1 / 18 / 19 Box Cr - combined Mod6 0 / 0 / 0 4/13/17 4/15/19 4/15/19 3/14/17 *Small rounding errors evident in Table 107 and Table 110. **Large areas already burned and treated. See ERA modeling and cumulative effects section for cumulative watershed impacts.  Empirical fire data effects have not been well looked at in southern Utah for 7th field HUCs, although they have been documented to be the source of damaging debris flows in steeper basins, which are well documented in two Cannon et al. papers (2010 and 2003) and Cannon and DeGraff (2009) [see debris flow section next]. Treatment at this level is complicated by a couple of factors. The smaller size makes it more efficient and economical to treat a larger percentage of the subwatershed in one entry. Due to topography and continuous fuels, it is often difficult to limit fire treatments to only a certain percentage of the subwatershed. It is not well established what an appropriate treatment level for 7th field HUCs are, generally speaking, for southern Utah. Discussion with professional hydrologists indicate that it is a scaling problem, however, and that if a treatment of a certain percentage is problematic at the 6th field level (i.e. 30 percent), than it is also likely to generally be an issue at that same percentage in the smaller 7th field subwatersheds. The regional standard and guideline for soils (USFS 2011) is for an “activity area” so it could certainly apply at a 7th filed HUC level.  The IRE stream surveys conducted provided streambank stability ratings, which can be adjusted for channel type. This streambank stability level provides an idea of the resilience of the stream to moderately increased sized watershed events. Petty’s (2004) Pfankuch data shows that Manning Creek and its tributaries are generally in good condition, which will help lessen effects of project work to this drainage. The Manning Creek drainage has a moderate level of treatments proposed (17 to 23 percent or 18 to 25 percent when combined with Barney Lake and Manning Reservoir), which is in between levels observed where reach scale impacts occur and populations are typically lost. The 6th field design feature would limit treatments at one time to 15 percent of the HUC. This would indicate that moderate-term population scale impacts could occur at the HUC6 scale. Manning Reservoir’s subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 21 to 38 percent, which due to topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but which are indicative of likely increases in sedimentation to the broodstock reservoir. Barney Lake’s subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 43 to 62 percent. Again, topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but these very high treatment percentages are indicative of likely major increases in sedimentation to the reservoir.  Monroe Creek drainage has a high levels of treatments proposed (27 to 37 percent or 27 to 36 percent when combined). There is no IRE data on this stream on stream stability to give potential to buffer impacts. The 6th field design feature would limit treatments at one time to 15 percent of the HUC. This would indicate that moderate-term population scale impacts could occur at the HUC6 scale. [Many of the steeper subwatersheds, which are planned for fire treatment, are debris flow prone and could have major effects below their confluences - see next section].  Annabelle Reservoir 7th field subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 45 to 65 percent. Again, topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but these very high treatment percentages are indicative of likely major increases in sedimentation to the reservoir.  Big Lake’s 7th field subwatershed is proposed for treatments ranging from 28 to 36 percent. Again, topography and location at the head of the drainage are not likely to generate events or debris flows, but these high treatment percentages are indicative of likely increases in sedimentation to the reservoir. These predictions are potentially low due to interaction with approved but not yet carried out treatments in this subwatershed.  On Koosharem Creek, proposed treatments are generally in the range where reach scale effects have been seen (less than 15 percent treatment area). Petty’s (2006b) Pfankuch data showed Koosharem Creek to be mostly in good condition, furthering limiting impacts. While Koosharem Creek impacts would likely be mostly localized and short-term, these predictions are potentially low due to interaction with approved but not yet carried out treatments in this subwatershed.  On Greenwich Creek, proposed treatments are generally just over the level where reach scale effects have been seen (less than 15 percent treatment area). Petty (2006b) however, found that a large percentage of Greenwich Creek is in poor condition, which will exacerbate impacts to this watershed. The stream is well dispersed across the landscape in several tributary drainages. Thus, impacts in this watershed will most likely be at the reach scale but moderate-term in duration.  On Box Creek proposed treatments are generally just over the range where reach scale effects have been seen (17 to 19 percent combined HUC). Petty’s (2006a) Pfankuch data showed Box Creek at its upper tributaries to be a mix of good (54 percent), fair (24 percent) and poor (22 percent) condition, which reduces its ability to buffer impacts. Predictions based on the above percentages are potentially low due to interaction with approved but not yet carried out treatments in this subwatershed. Therefore, overall, Box Creek impacts will likely be moderateterm extensive reach scale or smaller population scale affects at the HUC6 scale.  A design feature was added between the Draft and Final EIS that limits treatments in the Manning Reservoir, Barney Lake, Annabella Reservoir, and Big Lake subwatersheds to 20 percent at one time or at a level that keeps a current ERA model run at or below the TOC of 10. This will lessen the concerns expressed above for these 4 subwatersheds.  Debris Flow Risk  In areas of steep stream gradient and hill slopes, debris torrents from debris flow prone subwatersheds represent an additional concern for fisheries. After reviewing Cannon et al. (2003) Dale Deiter, the previous Forest hydrologist, observed that characteristics of many Forest subwatersheds make them highly prone to debris flow events given disturbances. Burning over 40 percent of these small, steep face side drainages at a moderate or higher intensity can place the treated area at high risk for a debris flow event. These risks were confirmed after the Devils Den wildfire in 2006, which burned the majority (mostly moderate to high severities) of two debris flow prone tributaries to Oak Creek: Devils Den and Limekiln Canyon. Storm events two months following the fire caused severe flooding and borderline debris flows out of these canyons, effectively extirpating the recreational fishery despite the fact that only a small percent of the total watershed was burned (see Table 109 for summary information). Thus, even small ephemeral tributaries can be of concern if they connect near the head of a trout population.  Two important considerations of debris flows are that they can cause considerable damage downstream of the fire boundary and that relatively small or common storms can trigger them (Cannon and DeGraff 2009). Western weather patterns since the mid-1980s have trended toward reduced snowfall, warmer spring seasons, earlier snowpack melt, and longer drier summers, which have altered fire regimes to more frequent, longer lasting large fires that pose greater debris flow risks (Cannon and DeGraff 2009).  The hydrology/soils specialist report (Solt 2015; appendix J in this EIS) looked at ten partial HUC6 level watersheds using the Cannon et al. (2003) model and found that eight of the ten are debris flow prone. If greater than 50 percent of these drainages were burned at moderate severity, they would all be prone to debris flows under the right precipitation events (Solt 2015; appendix J in this EIS). Discussed in the same order as other sections of the report, these drainages were Dry Creek, Manning Creek, Dry Canyon (limited aquatic resources), Monroe Creek, Thompson Basin (most aquatic resources in very upper end), Koosharem Creek, and Greenwich Creek. The two basins not debris flow prone – South and North Fork of Box Creekwere actually close to thresholds and could produce debris flows under the right conditions.  Potential for debris flows actually decreases as the watershed size looked at increases. These are generally issues with small steep subwatersheds at the HUC7 or HUC8 level. Floods from these small subwatersheds can have major effects downstream throughout HUC6 drainages; however, if they occur near the headwaters (see above discussion on Oak Creek, and Hadley et al. 2011b). Given this, the Forest fisheries biologist ran the Cannon 2003 model on several HUC7 and HUC8 tributary subwatersheds to Monroe Creek. All were debris flow prone according to the 2003 model.  This does not necessarily mean that treatment will result in a debris flow. It is highly dependent on the area treated, the fire severity affecting the soils, and precipitation received by the subwatershed after the fire. At the 7th and 8th field level this can be challenging for implementers, as the same factors that make the drainage debris flow prone make it difficult to control fire (i.e., these are frequently natural “chimneys” and their steepness and rugged nature often precludes work that could break up fuels to allow treatment of only part of the drainage at a time). Given the knowledge and concern, it is likely that implementers will be careful, and make choices that result in treatments that have lower probabilities of creating debris flows. What can be said, however, is that there are no design features currently in place to require these factors be considered at the 7th or 8th field level.  Since no detailed GIS analysis was conducted using later Cannon developed models by HUC, there are no ranking tables for this measure. This section serves as information to the deciding official and readers that debris flow prone subwatersheds are common in the project area, and with sufficient treatment levels, debris flows would be likely. The new models (Cannon et al. 2010 and Cannon and DeGraff 2009) factor in soil characteristics along with basin geography. With these new models, specific subwatersheds could be modeled; with an assumed rainfall intensity modeling could look at changes in area treated to potentially identify thresholds where debris flows would become much more likely. It is highly recommended that this modeling be conducted before treatments in any subwatersheds containing, or upstream of, high value aquatic resources and human property.  A recommended implementation action was added at the end of the report to run newer Cannon debris flow prediction models (Cannon et al. 2010, Models A, B, or C depending on what soil information is available or Cannon and DeGraff. 2009, page 186 - equations 9.6 and 9.7) for each debris flow prone HUC7 or HUC8 (identified as being debris flow prone using the Cannon et al. (2003) model) prior to actual implementation to determine if potential threshold points can be identified. These could help determine the appropriate sized treatment area to achieve desired results while greatly lessening the probability of severe downstream consequences.  Soil Suitability/Mass Wasting Risk  Mass wasting and other soil erosion processes, such as areas prone to slope failure or other high volume movements and hydrophobic conditions after fire are important to aquatic resources, as they have potential to introduce large volumes of sediment into stream channels where they can have major indirect effects to aquatic biota. Mike Smith, former Fishlake National Forest soil scientist, prepared maps showing soil suitability for various treatments by typical calendar dates (Fishlake National Forest file data). These maps help identify areas that may respond poorly to prescribed burning, for example. In the experience of the Forest fisheries biologist, the volcanic derived soils of Monroe are not likely as serious a concern for mass wasting and severe erosion as the shale derived soils in the Salina Creek drainage. The hydrological report notes, “Mass wasting is not a dominant process in the project area. However, rock fall, shallow landslides, deep-seated landslides, and debris flows may be potential hazards…in the hill and mountain portions of the project area…Special methods and erosion control best management practices may be needed to prevent or limit soil loss in the hill and mountain areas” (Solt 2015, page 25; appendix J in this EIS). This section serves as information to the deciding official and readers that soil wasting processes are not considered highly likely events that would affect aquatic biota, but could occur. Erosion events and processes, particularly rill, sheet, and gully erosion could occur off of steep slopes, some of which, based on the Smith soil maps, would be unsuitable for burning under some conditions. It is recommended that these soil maps be consulted when planning individual burn treatments, but overall general soils concerns are considered secondary to debris flow risk.  Equivalent Roaded Area Analysis  Analysis of a landscape scale restoration project is complex, as it covers multiple watersheds, and occurs alongside many past and ongoing land management actions, so cumulative effects are a major concern. In an attempt to incorporate these past impacts and actions – wildfires, prescribed fires, managed wildfires, timber sales, Dixie harrow treatments – and ongoing activities - particularly grazing and motorized transport – Equivalent Roaded Area modeling was used. The cumulative effect area of delineated subwatersheds (HUC6 and HUC7) was used as the base area. Geographic Information System figures were developed for the year of occurrence and acres of affected habitat within each subwatershed. Geographic Information Systems were also used to develop figures for road miles (including proposed temporary road for each action alternative), and riparian grazing (developed by overlaying the stream layer, and HUC boundaries).  The figures for acres of the various types of proposed mechanical treatment by HUC have not been calculated, so for this and other analysis methods an assumption had to be made to treat all mechanical treatments as harvest for modeling purposes. This likely overstates the effects of the proposed vegetation treatments. In the smaller 7th and 8th field HUCs where harvest levels are of most concern to aquatic resources (Barney, Manning, Annabella Reservoir, and Big Lake) the majority of mechanical treatments are likely timber harvest (thinning to BA 90), so modeling results in these HUCs is likely correct.  In all, 90 Excel spreadsheet worksheets were used to model 13 delineated subwatersheds at the modified 6th field HUC (often reduced in area to a pour point at major diversion, fish population end, or mouth of canyon), or smaller 7th or 8th field HUC containing important lakes and reservoirs. Two 6th field HUCs that were not modified and included large areas of low elevation land off Forest were not modeled. In three modified 6th field HUCS where smaller subwatersheds had been split out, the subwatersheds were also combined to show figures for the entire modified HUC6. Appendix H of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) has additional information on the methods used and assumptions made for this modeling exercise. Eighty spreadsheet sheets are summarized into Table 111 that ranks the no action and action alternatives for each of the modeled HUC.  Table 111. ERA percentage by sub-watersheds by alternative. TOC = Threshold of Concern HUC Name HUCtype TOC No Action Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper Mod6 12 3.3 10.1 12.3 13.4 11.6 Manning Cr – Upper Mod6- 10 4.5 9.5 10.5 11.6 10.5 MC – Barney Lake 7 10 0.6 12.5 17.6 22.1 22.3 MC – Manning Res 7 10 3.3 10.8 13.8 16.7 14.9 MC – HUC 6 combined Mod6 10 4.3 9.5 10.7 12.0 10.9 Dry Can – Hunts Lk 8 12 4.6 12.5 12.5 12.5 12.5 Monroe Creek Mod6- 12 1.1 8.9 10.6 12.6 10.7 MonroeCr- Magleby 7 10 0.2 6.1 8.8 10.1 8.8 MonroeCrcombined Mod6 11 1.0 8.7 10.9 12.5 10.6 Thompson Creek 6 14 Not modeled due to HUC configuration/lower elevations TC-Annabella Res 7 10 1.7 7.5 12.7 21.6 12.9 Water Creek 6 10 Not modeled due to HUC configuration/lower elevations WC – Big Lake 7 10 3.1 12.1 13.5 14.1 15.5 Koosharem Creek Mod6 10 4.3 7.3 7.6 9.3 7.3 Greenwich Creek Mod6 10 5.8 11.2 11.5 11.6 11.2 Box Cr above Res. 7 10 9.5 14.1 14.3 14.3 14.1 Box Cr below Res. Mod6- 14 5.3 11.6 14.5 13.1 11.9 Box Cr - combined Mod6 12 7.1 12.7 13.3 13.6 12.8  In general, the ERA modeling shows that under the current conditions (no action alternative), the western and northern modeled HUCs have relatively low ERAs, Koosharem and Greenwich HUCs have moderate ERAs, and Box Creek above the reservoirs already has a relatively high ERA. Alternative 2 generally raises the ERA to near the suggested TOC in watersheds that had relatively low existing ERA. The remaining action alternatives – Alternatives 3 through 5 – generally raise the ERA to at or above TOC levels.  Since Table 111 found that many of the modeled subwatershed exceeded the suggested Threshold-of-Concern (as developed by the Forest’s fisheries biologist), 10 spreadsheet sheets were developed and summarized into Table 112. This table shows how application of the design feature of only treating 15 percent of a HUC6 would affect the modeled ERA at the HUC6 level. This change was only applied to the alternative with the maximum ERA as determined in Table 111, which were alternative 4 in all cases.  Table 112. Change in ERA level due to application of treatment of only 15 percent of a HUC6 Mod HUC6 Area - Acres 15 % Level - Acres Max ERA Impact Alternative Original Modeled ERA – Max Alt. 15% treatment DF ERA 2nd Entry 15% (or remaining) Retreat ERA Up Dry Creek 9510 1427 Alt 4 13.2 7.6 11.0 Manning (combined) 16327 2449 Alt 4 12.1 9.0 11.0 Monroe (combined) 25199 3780 Alt 4 12.7 6.0 9.5 Koosharem* 3715 557 Alt 4 9.3 9.0 8.1 Greenwich* 11922 1788 Alt 4 11.6 11.0 10.3 Box Cr (combined) 19684 2953 Alt 4 13.6 12.1 11.2 *Proposed treatment is close to the 15 percent level already. Decline by second treatment is due to recovery over the 5 years assumed between treatments.  Applying the 15 percent design feature at the HUC6 level reduces the initial treatment ERA to below TOC in the three west Monroe HUCs. The ERA level rises considerably for the 2nd treatment in Dry Creek but remains below the suggested TOC (found in Table 111 ) due to the higher TOC for this subwatershed. In 2nd treatment ERA also remains below TOC for the Monroe subwatershed. In the Manning Creek subwatershed, however, ERA rises above slightly above TOC. In the Koosharem and Greenwich subwatersheds, applying the 15 percent design feature only slightly reduces ERA, as the proposed treatment level was already near 15 percent. By the time the small amount of remaining acres were treated in the 2nd entry, modeled ERA declines further due to recovery from past treatments. In Box Creek, the design feature reduces total ERA slightly to just above TOC for the initial treatment and just below TOC for the 2nd entry, due to the large area of existing and proposed disturbance.  As described in greater detail in Appendix H in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS), actual levels of impacts that occur during implementation are likely to be somewhat lower (due to implementation being spread over time, achieving design objectives of low to moderate fire severities, and including low fire severities as part of the 60 percent treatment area) if the project is implemented as designed. In some cases, impacts could be moderately lower than modeled. While the modeled results are likely the upper end of what could occur, since all factors were consistent between alternatives, the relative ranking of the alternatives can be used to help differentiate between them for decision-making purposes.  At the ERA levels calculated at the modified 6th field level one would expect moderate level impacts to aquatic biota that would occur over the short-moderate time frame.  In the Aquatics Specialist Report for the DEIS (Whelen 2015; appendix F in this DEIS) and Solt (2015; appendix J in this EIS), the concern was discussed for the potential of cumulative effects with the currently approved but not yet implemented or fully implemented work in the Box Creek, Monument Peak, and Cove Mountain Projects. The potential for cumulative effects overlap would occur primarily in the Water Canyon – Big Lake, Koosharem, and upper Box Creek HUCs. It is difficult to predict effects for two projects in the same area with different and unknown timelines. Running acres for the area of these three projects clipped to their respective HUCs, and making the unrealistic assumption that these projects would occur simultaneously (and completely) with the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project in year one, showed that the maximal increase in ERA would be about 7.0 percent for Water Canyon – Big Lake HUC, about 16.4 percent for the Koosharem HUC, and about 6.6 percent for the upper Box Creek HUC. Increases in adjacent HUCs were negligible.  Again, these figures are maximums based on very unrealistic assumptions. They do show, however, some reason for concern and provide information to help guide implementation – such as trying to give maximal recovery time between implementation of the previously approved projects and this project.  Additional design features were added between the DEIS and FEIS that further protect aquatic resources. One was to repeat the ERA modeling just prior to beginning work in a HUC6 subwatershed to incorporate the implementation of these previously approved projects and recovery periods for all past work done in the HUC prior to starting implementation of this project. In addition, use of more accurate figures for the area of planned mechanical treatments by type can be incorporated, which will likely reduced the level of impacts calculated for mechanical treatments from the level of this modeling effort. If the ERA modeling still indicates concerns, the design feature states, “multiple entries would occur to reduce cumulative effects to the subwatershed”.  At the smaller 7th and 8th field, ERA modeling shows much higher figures due to cumulative disturbance in some subwatersheds. Calculated ERA levels ranged from a low of 7.8 up to a high of 22.3, which could be considered very high (and well above TOC) based the Haraden (2013) calculated ERA for Shingle Creek and observed effects to fisheries there. For Barney Lake the ERA was very high for alternatives 3, 4, and 5; for Manning Reservoir the ERA was moderately high for alternative 3, 4, and 5, TC-Annabelle Reservoir the ERA was very high for alternative 4, for WC-Big Lake the ERA was moderately high for alternatives 3 and 4, and 5, and for Box Creek above Reservoirs moderately high for alternatives 2 through 5.  Another design feature was added for four key smaller HUC7 subwatersheds containing Manning Reservoir, Barney Lake, Anabella Reservoir, and Big Lake. This design feature limits treatments to 20 percent of the subwatershed area at one time or a level that keeps a current ERA Table 113. Summary of visual spatial review of proposed actions in relation to aquatic resources (see Apendix C from Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) for maps used in this review) HUC Name HUC type No Action Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper Mod6 No treatments Extensive burning in watershed but mostly below BT habitat. Minor timber harvest and burning within BT habitat. Extensive burning in watershed but mostly below BT habitat. Addition of much more timber harvest in upper watershed in. BT habitat. Similar to alternative 2 with even more harvest in upper watershed. Considerable portion of BT habitat treated. Similar to alternative 2 but with some middle elevation areas switched from prescribed burning to mechanical harvest. Manning Cr – Upper Mod6- No treatments Considerable portion of HUC treated. Prescribed fire proposed along most of fish bearing stream. Similar to alternative 2 w/ additional mechanical harvest between Collins Creek and Barney Cr. Similar to alternative 3 w/almost all of upper HUC now w mech. treatment. Considerable risk for BT and BVCT resources. Similar to alternative 2 but with some upper elevation areas switched from prescribed burning to mechanical harvest. MC – Barney Lake 7 No treatments Very high % of HUC above reservoir w/ prescribed burning. High risk to reservoir, BT, high value fishery. Similar to alternative 2 but w about 1/2 of treatment switched to harvest. High risk to reservoir, BT, high value fishery. Similar to alternative 3 but w/ addition of road around entire basin above reservoir. Very high risk to reservoir, BT, high value fishery. Similar to alternative 4 but w/ slight additional change of burning to harvest. Very high risk to reservoir, BT, high value fishery. MC – Manning Res 7 No treatments High % of HUC above reservoir w/ prescribed burning. Modhigh risk to critical BVCT broodstock, reservoir, high value fishery. Similar to alternative 2 w additional harvest along private, some burning S of lake switched to harvest. Modhigh risk to critical BVCT broodstock, reservoir, high value fishery. Majority of basin above reservoir harvested. High risk to critical BVCT broodstock, reservoir, high value fishery. Majority of basin above reservoir treated w/ areas close to reservoir harvested, further away burned. High risk to critical BVCT broodstock, reservoir, high value fishery. MC – HUC 6 combined Mod6      Dry Can – Hunts Lake 8 No treatments Moderate percentage of basin above lake proposed for burning. Mod risk to BT and other aquatic res. Same as alternative 2. Same as alternative 2. Same as alternative 2. Monroe Creek Mod6- No treatments High percentage of watershed proposed for burning. High debris flow prone risk for non-native fishery and property downstream. Minor treatments in headwater BT habitat. Similar to alternative 2 but with majority of headwater BT habitat treated, mostly mechanical harvest. Similar area of treatment of alternative 3 but with higher percentage of mechanical harvest in upper watershed. Similar area of treatment of alternative 3 but with highest percentage of mechanical harvest in upper watershed. Monroe Creek- Magleby 7 No treatments Most Forest admin. land in HUC treated w/ fire including BT habitat. Similar area of treatment as alternative 2, but about half of fire switched to mechanical veg treatment. Similar area treated as others but almost all mechanical vegetation treatment. Similar to alternative 3. Monroe Creekcombined Mod6      Thompson Creek 6 No treatments Considerable area of headwaters treated w/ prescribed fire, including majority of BT habitat. Similar to alternative 2. Similar area treated as other alternatives, but w eastern edge of HUC mechanical vegetation treatment. Similar to alternative 2. TC-Annabella Res 7 No treatments Nearly half the basin above reservoir and nearly half BT habitat proposed for treatment by fire. Mod-high risk to BT, fishery reservoir. Slightly more area treated as alternative 2 but about half replaced w/ mechanical veg treatments. Mod-high risk to BT, fishery reservoir. Similar area treated as alternative but with majority being mechanical veg treatments. Mod-high risk to BT, fishery reservoir. Similar to alternative 3 Water Creek 6 No treatments Moderate amount of fire and mechanical vegetation treatment w/ temporary roads. Moderate to high amount of fire and mechanical vegetation treatment w/ temporary roads. High amount of fire and mechanical vegetation treatment w/ temporary roads. Moderate amount of fire and mechanical vegetation treatment with no temporary roads. WC – Big Lake 7 No treatments Moderate amount of treatments in HUC, about . fire and . mechanical veg. Mostly avoids BT habitat. One problematic temp road. Similar to alternative 2 with slightly high percentage of timber harvest. Similar to alternative 3. Similar treatment zone as alternatives 2-4, but almost all mechanical veg treatment but with no temporary roads. Koosharem Creek Mod6 No treatments Moderate amount of treatment, mostly fire. Mostly avoids BT habitat and streamside zones. Similar to alternative 2. Slightly increased treatment area compared to alt. 2 and 3, more mechanical, slightly more BT and stream Similar to alternative 2. zone work. Greenwich Creek Mod6 No treatments Moderate amount of HUC treated, mostly mechanical vegetation. Moderate amount of BT habitat and upper streamside zone treated. Similar to alternative 2. Similar to alternative 2. Similar to alternative 2. Box Creek above Res. 7 No treatments Small to mod amount of HUC treated due to extensive past fire/treatments. Majority fire with some mechanical vegetation treat. Small to moderate amount of BT habitat and upper streamside zone treated. Similar to alternative 2. Similar to alternative 2. Similar to alternative 2. Box Creek below Res. Mod6- No treatments Moderate amount of mechanical vegetation treatment in headwaters, mostly away from streams. Similar to alternative 2 with slightly more mechanical treatment. Similar to alternative 3 with slightly more mechanical treatment. Similar to alternative 2 with one area of fire replaced with mechanical and no temporary roads. Box Creekcombined Mod6       calculation at or below the TOC. This will reduce impacts to these HUC7 subwatersheds helping to protect their aquatic resources. It will also help reduce concerns for overlap with approved work in the Big Lake HUC. A slightly higher level of treatment (20 percent) is specified for these smaller HUC7 subwatersheds than for at the HUC6 level (15 percent) for management efficiency.  In the Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake areas, the proposed fencing (Figure 21) would allow for spread-out implementation over several years due to the protection for regenerating aspen shoots. Without the design feature for 7th and 8th field subwatersheds, at the very high ERA levels calculated for some of them moderate to high impact levels to aquatic biota would be likely if implementation was carried out in a short time frame, and these impacts would likely be of moderate to long-term duration. With the 7th and 8th field subwatershed design feature and spreading implementation out across multiple entries over a reasonable timeframe in these basins, impacts will be considerably less.  Visual/Spatial Review of Action Alternative Maps by HUC  Quantitative tools for habitat effects analysis for boreal toads, BVCT, and other aquatic species are limited. When looked at across the landscape scale the juxtaposition of proposed actions (Figure 77 through Figure 80) and aquatic resources (Figure 73 through Figure 74) can be visually overwhelming. To get a better understanding of the spatial overlap of the project proposed actions with aquatic resources at the subwatershed scale, a series of maps showing each action alternative were prepared. Each printout showed from one to three subwatersheds. These maps are included in their entirety in Appendix C of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS). The professional experience and opinion of the Forest’s fisheries biologist was then used to interpret the potential effects at the scale of each watershed and discuss any relative differences between them. This information is summarized into Table 113 above. Finally, for the alternative synthesis section the information in Table 113 was simplified into a ranking system and incorporated into Table K-1, Appendix K of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS).  Boreal Toad PARC Habitat Management Guideline Consistency  During project development, boreal toad experts within the Forest Service, UDWR, other agencies, non-government organizations, and academia were consulted to develop design features. Input was limited, but several responses did indicate that the PARC habitat management guidelines were the best available science. As covered in Appendix F of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS), the publication for the southwest, which includes Utah, is in press, so the Northwest document was used (Pilliod and Wind 2008). All PARC habitat management guidelines applicable to public wildlands were summarized into Table 114, which also included the pertinent habitat measures from the Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Plan (Hogrefe et al. 2005).  The habitat measures outlined in these plans are quite general. In addition, as noted above, aspen regeneration efficacy, impacts to goshawks, and impact to roadless (IRAs) were the primary drivers in Alternative development. Thus, when compared to the habitat management guidelines table, most alternatives are either fully consistent or inconsistent (i.e. there was not a lot of gradation or ranges of varying degrees of consistency). There were limited differences between the alternatives, and these differences were primarily driven by roads and levels of treatment of boreal toad habitat and proximity of treatments to boreal toad habitat. Note that the PARC habitat management guidelines do indicate that allowing natural processes to function, or treatments to mimic these processes, are desirable from a long-term standpoint.  Given these considerations, for the synthesis section (Appendix K, Tables K-1 and K-2 from Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)) Table 114 was summarized using the following convention. Fully consistent (which no alternatives met) – 1, mostly consistent – 2, moderately consistent -3, areas of consistency concern – 4, areas of high consistency concern - 5. The no action alternative was rated 2 as the lack of treatments could be considered a concern. Most action alternatives were rated 3, due to some issues with closeness of treatments and season of work. A few specific HUCs with greater levels of concern were rated as 4 or 5; these were primarily based on roads and to a lesser extent large percentages of area proposed for treatment.      Table 114. Partners for Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) and Utah Conservation Partnership (UCP) habitat management guideline consistency with Monroe Mountain Aspen Restoration project alternatives   Alternatives PARC No. PARC Habitat Management Guidelines No Action Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5  Habitat/Linkages  P1 Ensure availability and protection of all essential and critical habitat types No impact Design features include measures for this HMG P2 UCP3.2.1 Maintain un-fragmented habitat. Minimize activities in corridors - PARC - 50-330 feet buffer on each side of streams No impact Mapped boreal toad habitat is 100m on streams and 300m on breeding sites, but some project activities are allowed within this. P3 Manage for a variety of stand ages and types at stand and landscape level No change from current conditions Part of purpose and need of project. P4 Identify and appropriately manage key and sensitive habitat features - Breeding sites and hibernacula are key sites No impact Breeding sites generally mapped but hibernacula have generally not been identified. Boreal toads could use localized small new/unknown breeding sites (they have been known to use flooded tire ruts in primitive roads), thus not all individual features located. P5 Reduce or prevent disturbance in headwaters. Create headwater reserves - Since headwaters are relatively low gradient plateau top they generally have human disturbance. Creating reserves is beyond the scope of this project. No change from current conditions Project will generally increase disturbance in headwater areas (also see ERA modeling section). P6 Retain cool moist microhabitats for forest associated amphibians No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG P8 Maintain/restore native vegetation structure- Grazing is likely affecting riparian and aspen structure in some stream reaches. Restoring structure requires multiage stands. No change from current conditions Project will primarily address a one-time regeneration, but the project aspen browse thresholds and adaptive management will help long-term with aspen regeneration (regeneration before stand loss also preserves long-term options for future management actions). P9 Consider a mix of protective measures, such as differing buffer widths, limited and no-entry No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG P10 Maintain natural wetland habitats and nearby uplands through the use of buffers No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG P11 Retain a representative proportion of aspen stands within the landscape No change from current conditions Part of the purpose and need of the project  Streams  P13 Focus management actions on achieving desired stream conditions (i.e. water temperatures, no/minimal sedimentation, longterm input woody debris No impact Design features are generally configured to meet habitat needs P14 Identify and specially manage stream reaches in natural and minimally disturbed watersheds No impact Project generally increases management and disturbance in Monroe Mt. watersheds P15 Retain large wood in riparian and streams/rivers No impact Design features include measures for this HMG P16 Maintain rocky substrates in streams No impact FNF Plan has S&G for % fines to maintain substrate size P18 Manage activities and ground disturbance in and near riparian areas No impact Actions other than fire and mechanical veg treatments are beyond the scope of this project. Project activities are managed through design features.   Water/Hydrology/Springs  P24 Maintain/restore natural hydrology of wetlands No change from current conditions Vegetation treatments under this project may help maintain natural hydrology if negative impacts are managed. P26 Buffer permanent and seasonal wetlands. Min 30-50 feet for seasonal wetlands No impact Design features include measures for this HMG for permanent wetlands P27 Map all wetland habitat for project planning No impact Small perennial seeps need better mapping to ensure they are protected. Currently this is identified for the implementation phase. P28 Maintain seasonal wetlands by retaining native vegetation around them – PARC 540-900 feet (100- 275m) No impact Vegetation treatments under this project may help maintain natural hydrology if negative impacts are managed.  Mechanical harvest/veg management  P30 In timber management areas, buffer wetlands. Leave some surrounding upland areas undisturbed No impact Design features include measures for this HMG UCP3.8.1 Protect habitats in forest stands adjacent to and within 2.5 miles (4km) of breeding sites No change from current conditions Not consistent Not consistent Not consistent Not consistent P31 UCP3.8.2 When feasible harvest timber during amphibian inactive seasons No change from current conditions Not consistent Not consistent Not consistent Not consistent P32 Schedule log-hauling adjacent to amphibian habitat in dry months or fall/winter No change from current conditions Not consistent Not consistent Not consistent Not consistent P33 During timber harvest, leave woody debris on site to decompose No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG - 15 tons/acre P34 Retain large trees and snags for future downed wood recruitment No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG P35 Minimize logging on steep slopes [Note: GIS averages slope, can allow harvest on local slopes > 40%. Most N. Forests limit harvest to slopes <35%] No change from current conditions Harvest limited to 40% slopes or less. P36 Avoid dragging logging materials across streams and seeps No change from current conditions Some areas of skidding across streams may occur but would not likely be common. P37 Replant disturbed areas with native species to reduce erosion, esp. skidding and landing zones No change from current conditions LRMP guidance on P39 In timber management areas, plan for connectivity between stands No change from current conditions Connectivity will be maintained by treatment mosaic and stand regeneration  Fire/Prescribed Fire and Vegetation treatments  P40 Restore historic disturbance regimes – fire No change from current conditions Part of the purpose and need of the proposed project P41 Use prescribed fire to restore natural fire regimes - Fire should mirror historic fire intervals and seasons. Avoid key amphibian times No change from current conditions Part of the purpose and need of the proposed project but seasons of burning and fire severities (due to fuel buildups) may be outside of historic conditions P42 UCP3.1.2 Conduct prescribed burns in late fall after first frost (through early spring) No impact Project design features describes this as desirable but not mandatory P43 In fuel/veg treatments retain some untreated areas as refugia No impact Fuels – 60% treatment target will leave some areas untreated as refugia. For mechanical hand treatment in boreal toad buffers 80% limit will also leave some areas as refugia. UCP3.1.1 Protect habitats in forest stands [from fire] adjacent to and within 2.5 miles (4km) of breeding sites No impact Not consistent UCP3.1.3 Determine impacts of fire through monitoring of known breeding sites No change from current conditions Project monitoring of boreal toads is required for all design alternatives  Transportation Networks  P47 Avoid roads in riparian areas. No change from Existing roads do occur within or along riparian areas. Beyond the Avoid orienting roads parallel to riparian areas - UCP-Close motorized routes within 50 meters of breeding sites where feasible (3.5.2.c) current conditions scope of this project. P49 Close unneeded roads, avoid construction of new roads No impact Not fully consistent. Some impacts in Water Creek and Big Lake subwatersheds, although some temporary roads were relocated slightly to reduce areas of concern. Similar to alternative 2 and 3 with additional road construction in Barney and Manning Res. and upper Manning HUCs. Alternative 4 but with no additional road construction in the Manning Res. and upper Manning HUCs. P50 Install arch culverts and tunnels in roadways. Replace old/failed culverts with passage friendly structures - UCP – Install culverts and bridges to allow for natural riparian zones and stream flows (3.7.1.a) No impact Required as design feature on any new roads in BT habitat UCP3.7.1 Minimize dispersal barriers posed by roads - UCP – Avoid developing new roads that bisect toad habitat (3.7.1.b) No impact Not fully consistent. Some impacts in Water Creek and Big Lake subwatersheds, although some temporary roads were relocated slightly to reduce areas of concern. Not consistent. Similar to Alternatives 2 and 3 with additional impacts in Barney Reservoir watershed. UCP3.7.2 Minimize habitat impacts due to roads - UCP – Buffer 150m between new dirt road and breeding sites (3.7.2.b) No impact Temporary roads in Water Creek and Big Lake subwatersheds generally routed to avoid close distance to known breeding sites. Not consistent in Barney Reservoir subwatershed.  Livestock Management   Recreation Management   Fisheries Management   Chemical Use   General/Miscellaneous  P61 Avoid practices that result in sedimentation and slumping. No impact Likely are differences between alternatives but not yet analyzed. P62 Avoid construction and habitat altering during months when amphibians are concentrated and vulnerable. No impact No timing restrictions but habitat areas are avoided (see p63) P63 Minimize soil disturbance when using heavy equipment near amphibian and reptile habitat No impact All action alternatives have a design feature with no mechanized equipment near streams and breeding sites P64 Reduce/remove impermeable surfaces near wetlands No change from current conditions Design features include measures for this HMG for timber harvest.  Boreal Toad Habitat Impacts (Treatments/Roads within BT habitat)  To help provide context for discussions of specific impacts to boreal toad habitat and risks to boreal toad individuals, additional information on life history, response to disturbance, and research needs is presented in this section.  Much of the information on habitat use and life history of boreal toads was developed through radio-tagging and tracking studies (Browne and Paszkowski 2010; Guscio et al. 2008; Goates el al. 2007; Goates 2006; and Bull 2006). Finding boreal toads can be very difficult away from breeding sites where they congregate. Their small size and propensity to hide in refugia, under banks, or in thick grass can make them difficult to locate. Personal experience of the Forest’s fisheries biologist during the 2003 to 2004 Monroe study (described in Goates 2006) was that often when one re-located a radio-tagged boreal toad, one would find another untagged toad nearby. Without the radio, both would have been missed. Studies of wildlife that involve handling of animals do introduce an element of risk to the animal being studied. The risk to the animal needs to be balanced against the need for information and the risk to the animal from other causes. In other words, not understanding life history and habitat use in relation to ongoing activities and land uses, new proposed land uses, and existing and potential threats also carries a risk to the population. Vandewege et al. (2013) describes the need for information and resulting radio-tracking study of the endangered Houston toad to obtain information necessary for conservation of that species.  Bull (2006) had high mortality and loss rates associated with her radio tracking study of 100 toads in five study areas in Oregon. Survival was 32 percent, predation 30 percent, 16 percent of the toads and radios were at some point not relocated, 13 percent had radios found without the toad (possible “slipping the radio” or predation), and 6 percent were believed to be lost from chytrid infections. While these losses seem high, Bull (2006) identified several important potential sources of predation - including ravens at one of the breeding reservoirs, red-tailed hawks, and common garter snakes, identified hibernacula sites, and answered key habitat use questions. Guscio et al. (2008) radio-tagged 22 boreal toads at three study sites. In their study, 64 percent survived and contributed data, 23 percent either disappeared or dropped the radio after tagging, and 13.6 percent died after tagging. While no data is given on survival or radio loss rates, in three summers Browne and Paszkowski (2010) radio-tracked 116 toads at three study sites. In working with an endangered toad in Texas, Vandewege et al. (2013) radio-tagged 21 toads using 3 different attachment techniques. Three toads lost radios during study relocations but there were no reported mortalities. They also utilized breeding site surveys and drift fences in their study and PIT tags and toe clips to mark individuals.  Bull (2006) found boreal toads in her study to be primarily terrestrial (81 percent) with the majority of terrestrial locations (81 percent) associated with refugia (in decreasing order of use) such as rocks, burrows, logs, depressions, and stumps/root wads. In terms of habitat use, Bull (2006) found toads to use habitat in direct proportion of its occurrence in her study area in Oregon, which included wildfire burned habitat and timber harvests. Toads preferred more open habitat and south facing slopes, generally with more rocks, water, and forbs than occurred in random comparison plots (Bull 2006).  Bull (2006) found large movements between breeding sites and summer habitat, with the largest movement of a boreal toad 6.2 kilometers, and average movements of 2.5 kilometers for females and 1 kilometer for males. Browne and Paszkowski (2010) found boreal toads moved 0.15 to 1.9 kilometers between breeding sites and hibernacula. Interestingly, Bull (2006) found toads moved shorter distances in burned forests than unburned forests (she hypothesized that it could be due to better habitat conditions or travel conditions that are more difficult). The fastest daily movement she found was 241 meters per day. Bull (2006) also found some toads moved across rough terrain, including down areas with steep cliffs and up steep-sloped rocky hillsides, while others used streams. In contrast, most toads in the 2003-2004 radio tracking study work on Monroe Mountain appeared to generally use streams for movement, except for some crosscountry movement between Manning and Barney Creeks.  Bull (2006) found that 95 percent of the diet of toads in her study were ants (primarily) and beetles, which is generally similar to other studies.  Bull (2006) found hibernacula at five sites in Oregon to be in rodent burrows, under large rocks, logs, root wads, and banks of streams and rivers, with only 27 percent associated (less than 1 meter) with water. Browne and Paszkowski (2010) radio-tracked boreal toads to hibernacula in three study sites in Canada, finding toads using peat hummocks, red squirrel middens, cavities under spruce trees, root tunnels, natural crevices, and abandoned beaver lodges. In two of the three areas, the majority of toads hibernated in [black] spruce-dominated tree stands. In the 2003 to 2004 radio tracking study on Monroe Mountain determining hibernacula location was not a primary goal (we attempted to remove radios before toads moved into hibernacula so that toads would not carry the radios into inaccessible areas before the batteries died) but enough areas of use were found in late season to find that small perennial and unmapped seeps (i.e. not on the Forest GIS data layers) that upwelled from root chambers under spruce/fir appeared to be important for hibernacula (Photo 11 and Photo 12). Other areas identified as hibernacula in the Monroe study were burrows and root chambers under riparian and even transitional zone shrubs (Photo 10) and old beaver dams. Several toads would often be found together in these situations, which is similar to the finding by Browne and Paszkowski (2010) that 68 percent of the hibernacula in their study were communal. This would increase the effect to the local population if hibernacula were impacted by management activities.  Guscio et al. (2008) found that in the northern forests of Glacier National Park (lodgepole pine, western larch, western red cedar, and western hemlock) boreal toads preferentially used severely burned habitat over partially burned habitat (unburned habitat was not a major component in their study area). They noted that boreal toad’s ability to move/disperse and their preference for open habitats facilitated their use of recently disturbed habitats but that presence of refugia in open habitats for protection against predation and maintaining water balance was crucial for their use of the habitat. Hossack and Corn (2007) documented short-term positive breeding responses of boreal toads to stand replacing fires in Glacier National Park. After the 2001 Moose Fire, nine burned wetlands were used for breeding the two years following the fire where reproduction had not been documented before. They also found increased reproduction after another fire in 2003 with 20 wetlands used for reproduction the year after the fire where only three breeding sites had previously been documented. Reproduction after the Moose Lake fire returned to pre-fire levels in year three. Bull (2006) found that wildfires did not appear detrimental to toads in her study as burned stands (that were not salvage logged) were used in proportion to their occurrence on the landscape (6 to 10 years post-fire).  Bull (2006) did voice concern, however, that fuel reduction treatments that reduce course woody debris, clear-cutting, and other harvest activities may limit toad movements and habitat use (by removing predation/thermal/moisture refugia), affect food availability (ants), and affect squirrels (that create burrows used by toads) noting additional research was needed. Guscio et al. (2008) also noted that more information was needed on the effects of direct habitat treatments, including timber harvest and fuel reductions.  In relation to buffers, Browne and Paszkowski (2010) found that at one of their three study sites, all hibernacula were within a 100m buffer from perennial water. At the other two study sites, the buffers ranged from 30 meters on small perennial streams, 60 meters on large (greater than 5 meters) streams, and 100 meters on lakes. Despite these relatively large buffer sizes, 84 percent of the hibernacula were outside of buffers at the second study site, and 90 percent were outside on the third.  Rittenhouse and Semlitsch (2007) used a univariate kernel density estimate to determine the probability of an amphibian being present at a given distance from a breeding site for salamanders, frogs, and toads. Their work was based on 13 studies, 2 of which were included boreal toads. The 99 percent isopleth (i.e. contour line of similar use levels) was less than 1 km from breeding wetlands in all cases, with 95 percent of amphibians within 664 meters and 50 percent within 93 meters of the wetland edge (Rittenhouse and Semlitsch 2007, page 155; Figure 73). Frogs and salamanders had similar distributions but frogs generally ranged about twice as far from breeding sites as salamanders. Boreal toads did not follow the same pattern, however, with less of a peak near breeding sites that implied they travel to specific resources not adjacent to the breeding site and not evenly distributed on the landscape (likely key feeding areas, refugia, and hibernacula). Their analysis of the Bartelt boreal toad data showed a distribution peak at about 300 meters from the breeding site, with the 50 percent isopleth at 375 meters and 95 percent isopleth at 980 meters (Rittenhouse and Semlitsch 2007, page 155 - Table 1 and page 156 – Figure 2E). Rittenhouse and Semlitsch (2007) note, however, that the area immediately adjacent to the breeding site may be essential for both breeding and recently metamorphosed juveniles. In summary, they note that amphibians may regularly use areas beyond buffers established for water quality protection (typically 100 feet), and that habitat loss at moderate distances from wetlands could affect a large proportion of the adult population of amphibians.  In contrast, Goates et al. (2007) found that many small streams and seeps that were not mapped on the Fishlake National Forest. Geographic Information Systems layer and buffered constituted the majority of relocations that were not within existing 30.5 meter (100 feet) streamside buffers. At Manning Meadow Reservoir, one of the key breeding areas studied, a 274.3 meter (900 feet) breeding site buffer [on just the area of the reservoir where breeding typically occurred] did less to protect areas of boreal toad use than a 30.5 meter buffer on all flowing streams, seeps, and water sources (see Figure 73). Thus Goates et al. (2007) found that ground truthing to locate, digitize, and buffer all of these small water sources was a critical factor to ensure protection of boreal toads. Goates et al. (2007) also documented use of adjacent upland habitat up to, and in lower numbers beyond, 100 meters from streams (see Figure 83).  The Forest’s fisheries biologist developed the study proposal and worked with seasonal employees in implementing the 2003 to 2004 Monroe Mountain boreal toad habitat use study in response to the earlier Monroe Mountain aspen restoration EIS that was further analyzed and described by Goates et al. (2007) and Goates (2006). Monroe Mountain has considerable open habitat available, so open habitat is not likely a limiting factor as it appears to be for boreal toads in the Northern Rocky Mountain areas, and that toads on Monroe used a variety of habitat types, mostly along or near water. At times during the summer, Monroe Mountain can be quite dry and warm given its lower mountainous elevation and southern Utah location. It is the professional opinion of this writer given his experience in working on this study and the above factors that 1) most within-drainage boreal toad movement during summer likely occurs along the streams within the drainage; and 2) boreal toad response to habitat projects would likely be similar to Fishlake 2003 & 2004 Max Distance from Water 02468 10 <10 10-24 25-49 50-74 75-99 100- 149 150- 199 >200 Distance (m) Number of Observations Female Male Bull’s (2006) findings that burned habitats are used by toads in about the same ratio as its availability in the mid to long-term.    Figure 83. Radio marked toad distance to flowing or standing water during summer 2003 and 2004 on the Forest (from Goates 2004).  All of these factors were considered when developing the project specific design features for this project. The Rittenhouse and Semlitsch (2007, Figure 2E) information was key in extending the buffer around breeding sites from 200 meters (UDWR recommendation) to 300 meters – to at least extend it to the distribution peak for density (i.e. toad density declines from this distance outwards). While the 50 percent isopleth was beyond this 300 meter distance, work by Goates et al. (2007) supports the premise that protection will be provided by buffering travel corridors and non-breeding site streams and wetland areas. Goates et al. (2007) documentation of boreal toad use up to 100 meters from streams supports the streamside buffer distance recommended by UDWR and used for general mapped stream drainages for this project. Finally, ensuring all unmapped streams and seeps have at least a 100-foot (30.5 meter) buffer incorporates the lessons learned from Goates et al. (2007) for buffering these unmapped waterways.  While design features have been incorporated into the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project to reduce the impact of treating boreal toad habitat, one can infer from the above information that both vegetation treatments and the lack of treatments in boreal toad habitat can have positive or negative effects to habitat suitability and individual toads depending on scale, timing, and location. Logically, it was felt that no treatment of boreal toad habitat could be negative, in having a progression towards domination of late seral habitat, too much conifer/woody cover, and increased fire risk (of particular concern bring the secondary detrimental effects of a large high severity fire to riparian, stream, and lake habitats). While treatment of some habitat could entail short-term risks to individual toads, it would reduce fire risk and ensure a variety of habitats and stand ages. Treatment of extensive areas could result in larger impacts to individuals and toad burrows/habitats due to much more physical disturbance within boreal toad habitat, however. These large areas of disturbance could result in loss of large wood and other features across large areas that are associated with hiding/thermal/moisture refugia, and hibernacula (often associated with spruce trees) on Monroe Mountain. They could also have effects to squirrels and other small mammals that affect toad habitat quality, and toad food supplies.  Therefore, Table 115 was summarized for synthesis under the following convention or rule set. Treatment of 1 to 20 percent of the mapped boreal toad habitat in the HUC – 1 (smallest overall impact – a reasonable level over a 10-year timeframe and likely beneficial), treatment of no mapped boreal toad habitat – 2 (no short-term impacts, but no creation of earlier seral habitat stages leading to less habitat variety in the long-term), treatment of 21 to 40 percent of the mapped habitat – 3, treatment of 41 to 60 percent of the mapped habitat – 4, and treatment of 61 percent or more of the habitat in the next 10 years – 5 (at this level much higher impacts to individuals would be expected, and habitat may shift to excessively open with too dry of microsites for boreal toad use on Monroe Mountain). It was felt that areas outside of the mapped boreal toad RHCAs were accounted for in the percent watershed treated and ERA modeling sections.  Based on that convention, the no action alternative rated as 2 for all HUCs. Action alternatives generally ranged from 1 to 3, with some HUCs - primarily smaller mapped 7th fields - having levels of 4 or 5.  Treatment disturbance was particularly high for the Barney Lake HUC in alternatives 4 and 5, and the Thompson Creek HUC in alternative 4. Treatment disturbance was very high for Barney Lake in alternatives 2 and 3, the Thompson Creek HUC in alternatives 2, 3, and 5 and Anabella Reservoir HUC in alternative 4. These high levels noted in this paragraph are likely to have much higher short-term impacts to boreal toads, with also a greater risk of creating unforeseen habitat impacts in the moderate term.    Photo 10. Unusual hibernacula used in North Fork of Box Creek in a burrow system under a shrub above the riparian zone. Note aspen in background. The shrub was located in a gentle swale bottom and may have had some groundwater influence.  Table 115. Percentage of boreal toad habitat proposed for treatment by subwatershed (created by using GIS to overlay project areas (summarized in Figure 74) and mapped boreal toad habitat). HUC Name Subwatershed Size - Acres BT Habitat Acres Acres and Percent proposed for treatment Acres mechanical/Acres fire (60% factored in) Total acres/% of BT habitat    Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper 9,510 901 49/46 95 – 10.5% 174/53 227 – 25.2% 265/53 318 – 35.3% 77/27 104 – 11.5% Manning Cr – Upper 14,855 1,044 68/209 277 – 26.5% 124/235 359 – 34.4% 212/205 417 – 39.9% 207/125 332 – 31.8% MC – Barney Lake 283 174 0/72 72 – 41.4% 61/35 96 – 55.2% 95/15 110- 63.2% 102/11 113 – 64.9% MC – Manning Res 1,189 539 3/85 88 – 16.3% 71/55 126 – 23.4% 145/11 156 – 28.9% 135/17 152 – 28.2% MC – HUC 6 combined 16,327 1757     Dry Can – Hunts Lake 241 107 0/18 18 – 16.8% 0/18 18 – 16.8% 0/18 18 – 16.8% 0/18 18 – 16.8% Monroe Creek 23,532 2,023 152/235 387 – 19.1% 428/193 621 – 30.7% 567/128 695 – 34.4% 337/124 461 – 22.8% Monroe Cr- Magleby 1,667 506 5/0 5 - 0.1% 25/20 45 – 8.9% 54/2 56 – 11.1% 25/20 45 – 8.9% Monroe Crcombined 25,199 2,529     Thompson Creek N/A (inc. off Forest) 355 0/178 178 – 50.1% 1/177 178 – 50.1% 109/112 221 – 62.3% 1/177 178 – 50.1% TC-Annabella Res 940 427 37/118 155 – 36.3% 135/58 193 – 45.2% 207/16 223 – 52.2% 136/58 194 – 45.4% Water Creek N/A (inc. off Forest) 420 38/13 51 – 12.1% 55/10 65 – 15.5% 55/10 65 – 15.5% 48/7 55 – 13.1% WC – Big Lake 3,409 700 102/14 116 – 16.6% 113/10 123 – 17.6% 122/5 127 – 18.1% 122/2 124 – 17.7% Koosharem Creek 3,715 475 7/17 24 – 5.1% 7/20 27 – 5.7% 43/18 61 – 12.8% 3/20 23 – 4.8% Greenwich Creek 11,922 1,322 296/40 336 – 25.4% 299/40 339 – 25.6% 299/40 339 – 25.6% 296/40 336 – 25.4% Box Cr above Res.* 8,470 2,089 76/130 206 – 9.9% 87/132 219-10.5% 87/132 219 – 10.5% 77/132 209 – 10.0% Box Cr below Res. 11,214 5 0/0 0 – 0.0% 0/0 0 – 0.0% 0/0 0 – 0.0% 0/0 0 – 0.0% Box Cr - combined 19,684 2,094     *Note: Box Creek cumulative effects are higher from past fires/treatments. Due to all of the past activities, the acres proposed for treatment in the Box Creek above reservoirs HUC under this project are lower. See ERA model for cumulative effects.  The PARC HMGs (Pilliod and Wind 2008; see Appendix F of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)) and the Utah Boreal Toad Conservation Plan (Hogrefe 2005) both provide indications that placement of new roads and increasing road network density in and near boreal toad habitat could be considered very negative to boreal toad habitat suitability. Fridell et al. (2000) documents a dead boreal toad from road mortality along the main road in the Manning Creek drainage in 1997, and Petty (2004) documented their own survey vehicle killing several recently metamorphosized toadlets near Barney Lake and noted that similar mortality by other road users Table 116. Boreal toad habitat road density with temporary roads proposed by subwatershed (summarized from GIS subwatershed, boreal toad habitat, and motorized routs within boreal toad habitat tables). HUC Name Subwatersh. Size - Acres BT Habitat Acres/Sq miles Road miles in BT Habitat/ Density Motorized Trail Miles BT Hab/ Den Temp Road Density Existing/ w/ Temp Roads  percent Increase Alter. w Temp Rds. Dry Creek – Upper 9,510 901 (1.408) 7.4 (5.26) .51 (.36) 0 5.62/5.62 0%  Manning Cr – Upper 14,855 1,044 (1.631) 2.52 (1.55) .64 (.39) 0 1.94/1.94 0% 4 MC – Barney Lake 283 174 (.272) .12 (.44) .61 (2.24) .68 (2.5) 2.68/5.18 93% 4,5 MC – Manning Res 1,189 539 (.842) 2.08 (2.47) .12 (.14) .03 (.04) 2.61/2.65 2.0% 4 MC – HUC 6 combined 16,327 1757  - - - - -  Dry Can – Hunts Lake 241 107 (.167) 0 .44 (2.63) 0 2.63/2.63 0%  Monroe Creek 23,532 2,023 (3.161) 2.90(.92) .78 (.25) .03 (.01) 1.17/1.20 3% 2,3,4,5 Monroe Cr- Magleby 1,667 506 0 0 0 0/0 0%  Monroe Crcombined 25,199 2,529 - - - - -  Thompson Creek N/A 355 0 0 0 0/0 0%  TCAnnabella Res 940 427 (.667) 1.3 (1.95) .21 (.31) 0 2.26/2.26 0%  Water Creek N/A 420 (.656) 2.06(3.14) .26 (.40) .26 (.40) 3.54/3.94 11% 2,3,4,5 WC – Big Lake 3,409 700 (1.094) 7.54 (6.89) 1.40 (1.28) .09 (.08) 8.17/8.25 1% 2,3,4,5 Koosharem Creek 3,715 475 (.742) 2.02 (2.72) 0 0 2.72/2.72 0%  Greenwich Creek 11,922 1,322 (2.066) 6.60(3.19) .27 (.13) .09 (.04) 3.32/3.36 1% 2,3,4,5 Box Cr above Res. 8,470 2,089 (3.264) 5.84 (1.79) 4.08 (1.25) 0 3.04/3.04 0%  Box Cr below Res. 11,214 5* 0 0 0 0/0 0%  Box Cr - combined 19,684 2,094 - - - - -  *Small area makes GIS numbers and density estimate unreliable for this HUC6  was likely (during metamorphosis there is a short duration of very high toadlet density near the breeding pond, which disperse over several days – this was literally a case of “poor timing”) [note - road and vehicle crushing mortality is one case of a direct impact that can occur from project actions]. Overall increase of roads near boreal toad habitat is considered in the ERA modeling section and the spatial analysis section. For this section, it was determined that increases in road length within actual mapped boreal toad habitat would be the most negative impact and should be considered separately. Since watershed area and toad mapped habitat varies by HUC, the increase was listed as a percentage increase.  For the purpose of the summary spreadsheet, Table 116 was simplified based on the following convention. The HUCs with no increase in road mileage ranked 1, an increase of 1 to 10 percent ranked as a 2, an increase of 11 to 20 percent ranked as 3, an increase of 21 to 30 percent ranked as 4, and an increase of 31 percent or greater ranked as 5. As can be seen in Table 116, most HUCs have little or no increase, but several key 7th field HUCs for boreal toads do have small increases, and one key boreal toad HUC, Barney Lake, has a major increase.  It is also evident in Table 116 that many of the HUCs have a very high existing road network density. Big Lake is exceptionally high at 8.17 miles per mile squared, dropping to 5.62 miles per mile squared in Dry Creek. All remaining HUCs are less than 4 miles per square mile, descending in the following order – Hunts Lake, Water Creek, Greenwich Creek, Box Creek above Reservoirs, Barney Lake, Koosharem Creek, and Manning Reservoir, which are all above 2.5 miles per square mile. When the temporary road is factored in, Big Lake and Dry Creek remain as number 1 and 2 in the rankings, but Barney Lake rises to 3 and Water Creek to 4. At this level of road density in mapped boreal toad habitat, clearly impacts to boreal toad habitat suitability and survival from roads would be a factor.  The simplified summary rankings of Table 115 and Table 116 can be found by looking at Tables K-1 and K-2 in Appendix K of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS). 3.4.8.6 Alternative Synthesis This analysis used 7 methods to help quantify the potential impacts of the no action alternative relative to the 4 action alternatives to aquatic resources. These methods were tiering to the hydrological/soils report, watershed treatment area percentage, equivalent roaded area, spatial review with aquatic biologist professional opinion, amphibian management guideline consistency, key boreal toad habitat proposed for treatment, and key boreal toad habitat proposed road increases. Each of these methods tells a slightly different story as effects vary by alternative, area, and the resource of concern (stream fishery, lake water quality, boreal toad viability, etc.). To help assimilate each of these analysis methods to a common frame of reference a synthesis table was developed (see Appendix K of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)).  First, a master table was established with rankings and/or scores for each of the alternatives for each of the HUCs for each method. A summary was tallied of all the rankings/scores. A higher ranking is indicative of more potential negative impacts to aquatic resources. Table 117, below, is derived from Table K-1 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS). The overall rankings are shown below to give the reader an idea of the relative level of impacts from each alternative. This score is then simplified to a simple ranking to show the order of potential impacts from least to worst. These overall ranking shows that of the action alternatives, 2 has the least impacts, followed by alternative 5, then alternative 3. Alternative 4 has the most impacts to aquatic resources.  Table 117. Overall synthesis score/ranking HUC Name No Action Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Overall Score 116 247 296 335 284 Overall Ranking 1 2 4 5 3  Table 118. Synthesis score by HUC HUC Name HUC type No Action Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper Mod6 8 14 20 26 16 Manning Cr – Upper Mod6- 8 16 20 25 17 MC – Barney Lake 7 8 23 24 32 35 MC – Manning Res 7 8 13 18 24 20 MC – HUC 6 combined Mod6      Dry Can – Hunts Lk 8 8 16 16 16 16 Monroe Creek Mod6- 8 16 23 27 19 MonroeCr- Magleby 7 8 17 17 19 17 MonroeCrcombined Mod6      Thompson Creek 6 7 14 14 16 14 TC-Annabella Res 7 8 20 23 27 24 Water Creek 6 7 15 16 16 13 WC – Big Lake 7 8 20 22 21 24 Koosharem Creek Mod6 8 14 18 17 13 Greenwich Creek Mod6 8 15 18 20 15 Box Cr above Res. 7 8 14 16 16 13 Box Cr below Res. Mod6- 3 8 13 11 11 Box Cr - combined Mod6       The overall ranking washes out some important differences by HUCs (i.e., overall alternative 4 may be most impactful, but in a specific HUC another alternative might have the most impacts – such as Barney Lake where alternative 5 has the most impacts). This information could be useful for the deciding officer to modify the decision by making HUC specific selections. So the information in Table K-2, Appendix 2 in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) was summarized into Table 118 below. This gives the actual score, to show the relative level of impacts. Then Table 118 was simplified to the simple ranking shown in Table 119. Table 119. Relative ranking (1 least impact-5 most impact) determined by synthesis score by HUC HUC Name HUC type No Action Alt 2 Alt 3 Alt 4 Alt 5 Dry Creek – Upper Mod6 1 2 4 5 3 Manning Cr – Upper Mod6- 1 2 4 5 3 MC – Barney Lake 7 1 2 3 4 5 MC – Manning Res 7 1 2 3 5 4 MC – HUC 6 combined Mod6      Dry Can – Hunts Lk 8 1 2 2 2 2 Monroe Creek Mod6- 1 2 4 5 3 MonroeCr- Magleby 7 1 2 2 3 2 MonroeCrcombined Mod6      Thompson Creek 6 1 2 2 3 2 TC-Annabella Res 7 1 2 3 5 4 Water Creek 6 1 3 4 4 2 WC – Big Lake 7 1 2 4 3 5 Koosharem Creek Mod6 1 3 5 4 2 Greenwich Creek Mod6 1 2 3 4 2 Box Cr above Res. 7 1 3 4 4 2 Box Cr below Res. Mod6- 1 2 4 3 3 Box Cr - combined Mod6       General Miscellaneous Effects Discussion  Under all of the alternatives, one of the “wild cards” of the analysis discussion is wildfire. This analysis and other specialist’s reports make the case that long-term the action alternatives (alternatives 2 through 5) would reduce the long-term risk of large catastrophic fires by reducing conifer domination/fuel loading and breaking up large contiguous blocks of fuels. Some apply the counter argument that therefore the no action implies a much larger risk of wildfire. This is true in the long-term but in terms of the proposed project timeline (1 to 10 years) it may or may not be true, depending on weather patterns, ignition sources, management response to fire, etc. Since all of the action alternatives are very similar in the area treated, varying mainly in how they are treated (mechanical verses fire), for the purpose of this analysis, the benefit from the reduction of fire risk is presumed to be primarily long-term and constant across all action alternatives. It has not been well developed in this analysis due to the unknowns (a typical approach that could be used would to model a range of fire sizes/severities for comparison to the action alternatives, but this would still not incorporate the relative risk). Given the benefits should be similar across the alternatives, for this analysis of aquatic resources this benefit was considered constant and the action alternatives were rated by their risk to aquatics from implementation effects (i.e. the positive is constant, so the decision criteria for aquatic resources can be the changes in negative effects from implementation).  It is often stated that managed fire is generally cooler and less destructive than wildfire. This may be true in the case of many fires looked at individually. Coming at it from the side of conservation biology of sensitive native aquatic fish and the loss or near loss of remnant populations and genetic diversity, however, it is not necessarily true. Over the last 20 years in southern Utah, there have been three large fire events that have had major consequences to native BVCT populations. Remnant stocks and unique genes would have been lost (and may yet still be lost for one) if it were not for the dedicated actions of fisheries professionals from multiple agencies. These three major fires were a wildfire actively suppressed from its ignition onwards, a prescribed fire that escaped prescription, and a managed wildfire allowed to burn for “resource benefits.” Thus, the empirical data from southern Utah over the last 2 decades show that wildfire, prescribed fire, and managed fire have all had about equal risk to important and irreplaceable native fish stocks. (As an aside, fisheries professionals are aware of the risks and are attempting to reduce them by dispersing stocks across the landscape, utilize areas where fire treatments have occurred for reintroductions, and conduct proactive fuels treatments to provide fire breaks within watersheds and reduce riparian fire risk/severities. However, these projects are long and time consuming to plan and implement).  Water quality is known to be an issue for Monroe Mountain lakes and reservoirs. This is in part due to parent geology as volcanic soils are high in nutrients, but human actions in the watersheds also play a role (Solt 2015 (appendix J in this EIS) and Deiter 2002). The design features incorporated into this project will reduce the incorporation of sediment derived nutrients into these water bodies (particularly helpful are no treatments within 100 feet of streams and 328 feet of breeding ponds/lakes, no direct ignitions within 100 feet of streams and lakes, and any rest from livestock grazing). Due to the scale of areas proposed for treatments, however, (Table 110 and Table 111), some sedimentation, and nutrient addition is still likely to occur. Fish kills have been noted on Big Lake, Manning Meadow Reservoir is known to be largely anoxic during parts of the year, and cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) blooms were observed on two Monroe Mountain lakes by Forest personnel in 2013 through 2014. These blooms can even reach toxic levels to animals, as was evidenced after a dog died from ingesting material from Utah Lake that was later shown to be 70 times the health advisory level (KSL.com, Toxicity levels in parts of Utah Lake 70 times the ‘healthy’ limit, October 21, 2014). Careful project administration and monitoring (shown below) and potentially additional mitigation actions (also below) would likely be needed to prevent major exacerbation of the lake nutrient problems.  The design feature of fencing treated areas near and alongside Barney Lake and Manning Meadow Reservoir (see Figure 21) will aid in the restoration of aspen shoots within the fenced area. This fence will generally eliminate livestock and wild ungulate use on the young shoots until they reach a height where they are released from grazing pressure. This will hasten the recovery of the burned area, reducing sedimentation to the reservoirs. The fence will also allow for treatment within the fenced area to be spread out over a longer timeframe to further reduce watershed impacts to these two lakes. The proposed fence may increase livestock pressure along the outside of the fence and in nearby unfenced areas, which includes portions of Manning Meadow Reservoir. Since Barney Lake is completely within the fenced perimeter, however, it will be fully protected reducing sedimentation to Barney Lake and temporarily eliminating the risk of injury to toads from livestock hooves within the fenced area. Proper livestock management will be important in the areas outside of this fence. 3.4.8.7 Aquatic Sensitive and Management Indicator Species Summary: General discussion for All Species  Effects of the No Action Alternative  Under alternative 1 there would be no vegetative treatments and no direct adverse effects would be expected to the streams BVCT, boreal toads, resident trout, and aquatic macroinvertebrates. Potential indirect effects would come from natural succession as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This change in vegetation communities could potentially affect fire risk, fire behavior, fire severity and recovery times, and watershed function.  A wildfire may have a negative effect on stream or lake water quality (depending when and where it burned), as it would likely occur in the summer months when control efforts are more difficult and the acreage burned area may be greater than the proposed project area. This would result in potentially more sediment moving into the streams and/or lakes following a post-fire precipitation event than from a planned prescribed burn. These high rates of sediment could cover gravels and spawning habitat and may adversely affect localized populations resulting in long-term negative effects to aquatic species.  Direct Effects of the Action Alternatives  Direct effects to BVCT, boreal toads, resident trout, and aquatic macroinvertebrates would generally be minimal and not of major consequence due to the required project design features. The one direct effect that is considered to be of higher probability is vehicle crushing of boreal toads in or near key boreal toad habitat. Design features have been incorporated to minimize this risk to boreal toads.  Indirect Effects of the Action Alternatives (Broken Out by Species/MIS)  Bonneville cutthroat trout  The proposed action may impact individual BVCT due to indirect effects. Part of the project planning area is important habitat for BVCT:  • Manning Meadow Reservoir has been managed as a southern UDWR BVCT broodstock operation since 1992. This source of pure BVCT has been instrumental in preventing BVCT listing to date, has helped refound several new conservation populations on the Forest, is important for native cutthroat for sport-fishing stocking (to eliminate the need to stock non-native cutthroat trout), and currently provides over 500,000 eggs annually to meet UDWR needs. • Manning Creek has been managed as a UDWR core conservation population since 1996. For many years, it was one of the larger populations on the Forest, functions as a partial metapopulation, and provides high quality habitat for BVCT. • The Manning Creek watershed contains the only BVCT core conservation population lake habitat on the Forest. Manning Meadow Reservoir provides a high quality sport fishery after the lake opens for fishing following broodstock operations. Barney Lake, where BVCT co-occur with sterile hybrid tiger trout, provides a high quality fishery.  The following factors make impacts to BVCT highly likely to occur from the proposed actions.  • A considerable portion of the Manning Creek drainage is planned for treatment under all action alternatives. 1) Treatment is proposed for 17 to 23 percent of the land area in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed excluding the upper reservoirs. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir 21 to 38 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Barney Lake, 43 to 62 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. When all areas are considered together, 18 to 25 percent of the land area in the mapped Upper Manning Creek HUC (see Figure 72) is planned for treatment. i. These treatments at the 6th field HUC are at levels where population scale effects have been experienced by other fish populations based on effects of past fires in the UDWR region. ii. The Forest does not have experience at modeling at the 7th field HUC level, but communication with professional hydrologists indicate reasons for concern at high treatment percentages at the 7th field level. 2) Equivalent Roaded Area modeling found ERAs for the action alternatives to be near, at, or above the suggested TOC 10. ERA values ranged from 9.5 to 11.6 in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed excluding the upper reservoirs. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir ERA ranged from 10.8 to 16.7 for the action alternatives. Above Barney Lake ERA ranged from 12.5 to 22.3 for the action alternative. When all areas are considered together, the ERA ranged from 9.5 to 12.0. i. These treatments at the 6th field HUC are at ERA levels where population scale effects have been experienced by other fish populations on the Forest based on observed fisheries effects and calculated ERA values by Haraden (2013) on the Twitchell Canyon fire. 1. Calculated ERAs for North Fork of North Creek and Indian Creek were 9 and 10.3 (Haraden 2013). These fish populations suffered population scale declines. 2. Calculated ERAs for Fish Creek and Shingle Creek were 14.4 and 15.5 (Haraden 2013). These fish populations were effectively lost. ii. The Forest does not have experience at predicting effects at the 7th field HUC level based on ERA calculations and monitoring for results, but the high levels calculated for Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake would seem to indicate need for extreme caution and multiple entries. A design feature was added to limit treatments in the Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake subwatersheds to 20 percent at one time or a level that results in a current ERA modeling of less than or equal to the TOC of 10. This will reduce the potential impacts of the project in these key subwatersheds.  The following factors and project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling and make it likely that while population scale effects could occur, they would not likely be at a scale of a trend towards federal listing.  • Since BVCT in Manning Creek overlap boreal toad habitat above 8,000 feet, in this zone above 8,000 feet there is a 100 foot stream buffer and 328 foot breeding site buffer with no harvest. There is also a zone from 100 feet to 328 foot from streams and 328 feet to 984 feet from breeding sites where no mechanized equipment can be used for harvest. 1) This buffer distance will filter out the vast majority of overland sediment flow [not channelized] before it can reach the creeks or lakes. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the LRMP (FP IV-33) that states: “Special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet” (IV-33). • Treated areas would be rested from livestock grazing for two to three growing seasons (i.e. usually grazed late the 2nd year). This reduces cumulative effects from livestock grazing. • Aquatic Invasive Species control measures are included as a design feature, which should effectively eliminate the risk of bringing in new AIS or spreading AIS currently on the mountain. Drafting will include screens to prevent intake of fish or amphibians. • Upland areas would be treated first and separately from riparian areas. • No more than 15 percent of the upland area at the modified HUC6 area would be treated at one time. The area would then be allowed to recover [comparable to pre-treatment] watershed function, after which an additional 15 percent could be treated, or the remaining area if less than 15 percent. 1) Empirical data from past fires in southern Utah show that trout populations are likely to survive at this level and habitat suffer only minor short-term negative impacts. • No more than 5 to 10 percent of the riparian area within a modified HUC6 subwatershed would be treated at one time. The area would then be allowed to recover [comparable to pre-treatment] riparian function, after which an additional 5 to 10 percent could be treated. • Post-treatment visual monitoring would be conducted to determine potential for increased sediment into streams. Localized treatments of straw mulch, wood chips, slash placement, seeding, and silt fencing could be installed as needed to control, prevent, or minimize effects from soil erosion. • Snags (200 to 300 per 100 acres) and downed logs (50 per 10 acres) would be left which will help provide large wood for habitat formation/diversity. • Ground based treatments would occur only on slopes less than 40 percent. • Equipment use within riparian areas would occur only when soils were dry, frozen, or covered with snow to prevent wheel or track damage. Low ground pressure equipment would be used when possible. • Temporary roads would be reclaimed upon completion of the mechanical treatments. • No skid trails or landings would be constructed in riparian areas. • No direct ignitions would occur in riparian areas on slopes greater than 40 percent. Prescribed burning would be ignited when low to moderate fire severities would be expected in riparian areas and spruce/fir or conifer stands with very low aspen component (less than 15 recruits per acre). Since BVCT in Manning Creek overlap boreal toad habitat above 8,000 feet, in this zone above 8,000 feet there is a 100 foot no direct ignition zone along streams (fire could back in). 1) The 100-foot no ignition zone along streams will trap the majority of overland sediment [not channelized] flow from shallower slopes along treated/burned areas and capture a portion of the sediment from steeper slopes. This will reduce sediment delivery to the streams. The 100-foot no ignition zone will likely maintain stream shading and stream temperature at levels nearly the same as for the no action alternative. A 100-foot no ignition zone will also likely maintain large woody debris levels very close to the no action alternative. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the LRMP for vegetation treated by burning (LRMP IV-49) that apply to wildlife, which states: “Limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values”. 2) Nutrient loading effects from the burning will be reduced by passage of overland water flow and sediment through the riparian buffer (Belt et al. 1992 4:3). • Other boreal toad design features will provide additional protection. • The soils and hydrology report suggests very little additional risk of sediment delivery from areas burned at low intensity/severity. • The prescribed burning as proposed (with a mix of fire severities planned to primarily have low to moderate severities) would likely have less negative effects then a wildfire. • The proposed treatments would reduce the risk of a large high severity wildfire in the drainages treated. • The fish populations at the stations within the project area sampled appeared relatively robust. The majority of Manning Creek and its tributaries had good streambank stability as determined by Pfankuch adjusted for stream channel type (Petty 2004, Appendix I). • A design feature was added to limit treatments in the Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Lake subwatersheds to 20 percent at one time or a level that results in a current ERA modeling of less than or equal to the TOC of 10. This will reduce the potential impacts to BVCT in these key subwatersheds. • Prior to beginning implementation within a HUC6 subwatershed, an updated ERA model run will be made to incorporate newly undertaken permitted activities, recovery periods for past actions, etc., which will help plan implementation to reduce cumulative effects. • There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on BVCT (see cumulative effects section). • Fencing of Manning Meadow Reservoir and Barney Reservoir treatment areas will ensure good protection of sprouts and likely increase the amount and rate of aspen recovery within the treated area, reducing sedimentation to the reservoir. It also would allow for multiple entries, which could spread the treatment effects over time, which will help implement the new design feature limiting treatment areas in these two subwatersheds.  The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to Bonneville cutthroat trout, their population will be maintained in the aquatic CEA in the longterm.  Boreal Toad – The situation for the boreal toad is similar to the one above for BVCT (since they both occur in the Manning Creek drainage) with the following additional considerations project area wide:  • The entire upper elevation zone of Monroe Mountain can be considered crucial habitat for boreal toads. This mountain acts as a large conservation metapopulation for boreal toads. While monitoring to date has limited power to determine trends (K.Wheeler, UDWR native aquatics biologist, personal communication), professional opinion is that populations have been stable, at least until around 2012. Mountain-wide, over 11,000 acres has been mapped as important boreal toad habitat  The following factors make impacts to boreal toad highly likely to occur from the proposed actions.  • A considerable portion of the watersheds containing boreal toad habitat on Monroe Mountain are planned for treatment under all action alternatives. 1) Treatment is proposed for 18 to 25 percent of the land area in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed. Above Manning Meadow Reservoir, 21 to 38 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Barney Lake, 43 to 62 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Hunts Lake 29 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. Treatment is proposed for 27 to 36 percent of the Monroe Creek subwatershed. Above Magleby Reservoir, 20 to 29 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Annabella Reservoir, 45 to 65 percent of the area is proposed for treatment. Above Big Lake, 28 to 36 percent of the area is proposed for treatment and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. Treatment is proposed for 11 to 15 percent of the Koosharem Creek subwatershed and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. Treatment is proposed for 15 to 17 percent of the Greenwich Creek subwatershed. Treatment is proposed for 17 to 19 percent of the Box Creek subwatershed and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. i. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad effects at the 6th field HUC but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at levels over 15 percent due to potential watershed effects to breeding sites and riparian use areas (i.e. flooding may cause sediment deposition on breeding sites and downcutting that dewaters riparian areas and makes them unsuitable for future toad use). ii. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad impacts vs. watershed area treated at the 7th field HUC level, but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at the high treatment percentages at the 7th field level in some boreal toad used HUCs. 2) Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling found ERAs for the action alternatives to be near, at, or above the suggested Threshold of Concern (10). ERA values ranged from 9.5 to 11.6 in the upper Manning Creek subwatershed (TOC 10). Above Manning Meadow Reservoir ERA ranged from 10.8 to 16.7 for the action alternatives. Above Barney Lake ERA ranged from 12.5 to 22.3 for the action alternatives. Above Hunts Lake, the ERA was 12.5 (just over the TOC of 12). ERA values ranged from 8.9 to 12.6 in the Monroe Creek subwatershed (TOC 11). Above Magleby Lake ERA ranged from 6.1 to 10.1 (TOC 10). Above Annabella Reservoir the ERA ranged from 7.5 to 21.6 (TOC 10). Above Big Lake, the ERA ranged from 12.1 to 15.5 (TOC 10) and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. ERA values ranged from 7.3 to 9.3 in the Koosharem Creek subwatershed (TOC 10) and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. ERA values ranged from 11.2 to 11.6 in the Greenwich Creek subwatershed (TOC 10). ERA values ranged from 14.1 to 14.3 in the Box Creek above Reservoirs subwatershed (TOC 12) and this does not include some approved but not yet implemented or completed treatments. i. The Forest does not have experience at modeling boreal toad effects at the 6th field HUC at various ERA levels but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at levels over suggested TOCs. ii. The Forest does not have experience at predicting boreal toad effects at the 7th field HUC level based on ERA calculations and monitoring results, but professional opinion would indicate reasons for concern at high treatment percentages at the 7th field level. • A considerable portion of the boreal toad mapped habitat (RHCAs) is planned for treatment. • In several subwatersheds, a considerable portion of mapped boreal toad habitat (RHCAs) already contains very high existing road densities, and planned temporary roads will increase this density further.  Various factors and project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling/considerations and make it likely that while local or even some multiple watershed scale effects could occur to boreal toads in the short to moderate term, they would not likely be long-term effects or at a scale of a trend towards federal listing. For boreal toads, this includes all of the factors listed under Bonneville cutthroat trout, which will not be repeated here, and the following additional factors:  • Project implementation would utilize boreal toad Riparian Habitat Conservation Areas (RHCAs) of 328 feet from each side of streams as buffers for vegetation treatments. Utilize RHCAs of 984 feet from known boreal toad breeding ponds (see Figure 74 for mapped RHCAs). • In order to protect boreal toads and hibernacula31 from being crushed, no ground-based mechanized harvesting equipment would be permitted within the RHCAs. • Within the RHCAs, vegetation treatments would be limited to hand-thinning, horse, or helicopter thinning up to 100 feet from the stream or up to 328 feet from the known boreal toad breading ponds. • No vegetation treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within 100 feet of perennial streams or within 328 feet of breeding ponds unless such treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist (see more detailed description of exception language in the design features section of the FEIS and this report and an example of exception documentation in Appendix M of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)). 1) This will filter out the majority of overland sediment flow [not channelized] before they reach the creeks. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the LRMP (FP IV-33) that states: “Special protection and management will be given to floodplains, wetlands, and all land and vegetation for a minimum of 100 feet from the edges of all perennial streams, lakes, and other bodies of water or to the outer margin of the riparian ecosystem if wider than 100 feet” (IV- 33). • Within the RHCAs, no pile/slash burning would occur within 100 feet from the stream or breeding sites edge. Within the remainder of the RHCAs, pile or slash burning would occur on upland vegetation types during the boreal toad dormant season (October 1 thru April 15) unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. Some scattered slash and slash piles may be left to provide habitat for boreal toads. • Within the RHCAs, snags (200 per 100 acres in aspen, 300 per 100 acres in mixed conifer spruce/fir, and large downed logs (50 per 10 acres; a minimum of 15 tons per acre) would be retained as cover for toads. This is the same criteria as general project criteria for snags and downed logs. • Within the RHCAs, thinning treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would target less than or equal to 60 percent of the stands if treated for complete conifer removal (aspen cover type) or thinning to BA 90 (spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types); or would target less than or equal to 80 percent of aspen, spruce/fir, or mixed conifer stands if treated by thinning conifer from below up to 8 inch DBH. • If any unmapped perennial streams or water sources in boreal toad supporting habitat were encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 100-foot buffer. No treatments (hand treatment, horse, or helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. • If any boreal toad hibernacula were encountered during project implementation, these areas would be protected by a 328-foot buffer. No treatments (hand treatment, horse, or 31 An opening where Boreal toads can go underground. helicopter thinning) would be allowed within this buffer unless treatments are coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. • Temporary roads within the RHCAs would have toad passage friendly culverts installed where culverts are needed (buried culverts or bottomless arched structures) for the duration of the project. • Dipping or drafting water for fire activities from smaller boreal toad breeding sites that may show a change in water levels from the use would be avoided, except for emergencies. • Required monitoring of boreal toad populations and habitat use would occur (in addition to current levels by the UDWR) to document project effects and to help plan future vegetation management projects in boreal toad habitat. This would include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations (see Appendix J of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS)). • Within the RHCAs, prescribed burning would occur when generally low to moderate fire intensity and severities would be expected. Prescribed fire personnel would attempt to implement prescribed burning during the boreal toad dormant season (1 October thru April 15). • No direct fire ignitions would occur within 100 feet from the streams and 328 feet from boreal toad breeding ponds unless coordinated with and approved by the Forest’s fisheries biologist. Fire ignitions could occur outside these buffers and allowed to back into these areas. • The 100 foot no ignition zone along streams will trap the majority of overland sediment [not channelized] flow from shallower slopes along treated/burned areas and capture a portion of the sediment from steeper slopes. This will reduce sediment delivery to the streams. The 100-foot no ignition zone will likely maintain stream shading and stream temperature at levels nearly the same as for the no action alternative. A 100-foot no ignition zone will also likely maintain large woody debris levels very close to the no action alternative. This design feature is consistent with guidance found in the Fishlake Forest Plan for vegetation treated by burning (LRMP IV-49) that apply to wildlife, which states: “Limit use of prescribed fires on areas adjacent to riparian areas to protect riparian and aquatic values”. • A design feature was added to limit treatments in the Manning Meadow Reservoir, Barney Lake, Annabella Reservoir, and Big Lake subwatersheds to 20 percent at one time or a level that results in a current ERA modeling of less than or equal to the TOC of 10. This will reduce the potential impacts to boreal toads in these key subwatersheds. • There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on boreal toads (see cumulative effects section).  The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to boreal toads, their populations will be maintained in the aquatic CEA.  Resident Trout – The situation for resident trout is similar to the ones above for BVCT and boreal toad (since they occur together in most of the drainages) with the following additional considerations project area wide:  • Resident trout occur in Monroe Creek and its tributaries (including Magleby Lake on private land), Thompson Creek HUC (including Deep Lake and Annabella Reservoir), Water Canyon HUC (including Big Lake), Koosharem Creek, Greenwich Creek and its tributaries, and Box Creek and its tributaries (including upper and lower Box Creek Reservoir). The streams, lakes, and reservoirs listed above provide high local value as recreational fisheries.  The following additional factors make impacts to resident trout highly likely to occur from the proposed actions.  • A considerable portion of the fish supporting drainages are planned for treatment under all action alternatives as discussed above in the Bonneville cutthroat trout and boreal toad sections above. • Two of the streams in the project area not yet discussed above have only marginal stream stability (as measured by Pfankuch), which makes them more susceptible to project impacts. 1) Greenwich Creek stability was 57 percent good stability, 6 percent fair stability, and 37 percent poor stability. These streambanks will not be resistant to erosive energy from floods and high flows, which have considerable suspended sediment and bedload. 2) Box Creek stability was 54 percent good stability, 24 percent fair stability, and 22 percent poor stability. These streambanks will not be resistant to erosive energy from floods and high flows, which have considerable suspended sediment and bedload.  The following factors and project design features reduce the effects expected from the above modeling and make it likely that while population scale effects could occur, they would not likely be at a scale of losing these resident fish populations.  • In areas where resident trout overlap boreal toad mapped RHCAs, boreal toad buffers will provide protection of resident trout habitat for mechanical treatments and prescribed fire treatments (see discussion in boreal toad section above). • One of the streams not yet discussed above has decent stream stability (as measured by Pfankuch), which makes it more resistant to project impacts. 1) Koosharem Creek stability was 86 percent good stability, 8 percent fair stability, and 6 percent poor stability. • There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on resident trout (see cumulative effects section).  The conclusion of all of the above factors in combination is that while there will be impacts to resident trout, their long-term populations will be maintained in the aquatic CEA.  Aquatic Macroinvertebrates - The situation for aquatic macroinvertebrates are similar to the ones above for Bonneville cutthroat trout, boreal toad, and resident trout (since aquatic macroinvertebrates (as used in a MIS) occur in trout supporting streams throughout the planning area) with the following additional considerations project area wide:  • Aquatic macroinvertebrates occur in all trout supporting streams on Monroe Mountain.  The factors described above for Bonneville cutthroat trout, boreal toads, and resident trout, make impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrates highly likely to occur from the proposed actions.  The following factors and project design features, in addition to all of the ones listed above for Bonneville cutthroat trout, boreal toads, and resident trout, reduce the effects expected and make it likely that while short to moderate-term effects could occur, they would not likely result in a long-term reduction of habitat quality for clean water aquatic macroinvertebrate taxa.  • Belt et al. (1992 2:4, 5:6) indicates that a 98-foot buffer strip is adequate to maintain macroinvertebrate diversity at pre-harvest levels in clear-cut areas, where a 33-foot buffer strip was inadequate, which indicates the 100-foot (plus – depending on zone and treatment) buffer minimum within boreal toad occupied habitat will also help trap sediments from mechanical vegetation treatments and prescribed burning. • The soils and hydrology report suggests very little additional risk of sediment delivery from areas burned at low intensity/severity. • The is a project design feature of limiting 6th field HUC treatments to less than 15 percent of the sub-watersheds [moderate to high severities] at one time; empirical data from past fires in southern Utah show that at this level stream habitat is likely to suffer only minor or short-term negative impacts. • McGurk and Fong (1995) so no impacts to aquatic macroinvertebrates when 5 percent of a streamside impact zone was affected. This project has a design feature limiting riparian area treatments to 5 to 10 percent of a HUC6 until it has recovered, which will limit impacts to the short to moderate term. • There are no long-term adverse cumulative effects of this project on aquatic macroinvertebrates (see cumulative effects section).  All of the above factors in combination will help protect the aquatic macroinvertebrate community structure, diversity, and BCI ratings in the aquatic CEA. 3.4.9 Cumulative Effects This cumulative effects section considers the effects to the aquatic species previously discussed. The cumulative effects analysis area (CEA) for aquatic resources is shown in Figure 72. This area was selected because of continuity of aquatic habitat and watershed areas found in the project area.  The cumulative effects being described include past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions. This area includes known or predicted habitat use areas of the aquatic species analyzed in this document.  In terms of fisheries, the project area streams and watersheds are changed from their presettlement condition. Water reservoirs, diversions, and canals alter the natural movement and timing of water in this watershed. The native cutthroat trout have been affected by new human land uses in the watershed, as well as the introduction of non-native trout species since pioneer settlement.  The cumulative effects discussed in detail below include:  Cattle Grazing Vegetation Treatment Projects Wildfires Recreational Activities Travel Management Special Uses Water Management 3.4.9.1 Cattle Grazing Cattle grazing has occurred for over 100 years within the CEA. Standards and guidelines for livestock grazing have been established in specific plans and are administered by rangeland specialists. Generally these plans permit moderate grazing utilization levels and incorporate a deferred or rest rotation system to allow for improved plant vigor and residual biomass on part of the allotment each year. Historic grazing typically removed more vegetation and was permitted for longer grazing seasons; this reduced vegetation that provided forage for some species, and nesting habitat with cover for other wildlife species. Currently through better rangeland management these effects are generally being reduced and improvement is occurring range wide as amount of vegetation and grazing seasons are more closely monitored and enforced. Grazing management decisions such as the forest utilization standards and guidelines (2001) provide direction for the management of livestock on National Forest System lands within the CEA on District.  Implementation of an action alternative may increase forage on upland areas. This may disperse grazing pressure more evenly throughout the area, and reduce grazing pressure in riparian areas and along creeks. 3.4.9.2 Vegetation Treatment Projects Vegetation treatment projects include: prescribed burns, mechanical vegetation treatments, fuel reduction projects, firewood gathering, and noxious weed spraying. Previous mechanical fuels/vegetation treatments that are likely still affecting watershed function are included in the watershed ERA modeling in Appendix H of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS).  Noxious weed spraying occurs in an effort to control or eliminate noxious weeds. Noxious weeds are more likely to gain footholds in disturbed areas such as along roads, dispersed campsites, grazed areas, and timber sales. Noxious weed control is an important management tool to prevent the spread and establishment these ecological pests. Spraying is done in accordance with an environmental assessment prepared for the Forest and has little cumulative effect to aquatic resources. Preventing the further spread of noxious weeds is a beneficial action. 3.4.9.3 Wildfires The vegetation communities on Monroe Mountain form a fire-adapted ecosystem, and there have been numerous wildfires historically. In the previous 15 years (2000 through 2009) there have been large wildfires, prescribed fires, and a prescribed fire that escaped prescription. Wildfires will likely continue to occur within the analysis area. Previous wildfires, managed wildfires, and prescribed fires that are likely still affecting watershed function are included in the watershed ERA modeling in Appendix H of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS). Selection of the no action alternative may increase the probability of a large wildfire with more detrimental impacts to aquatic species due to fuel buildup and high fuel loadings.  Fire suppression, especially when coupled with changes in land use such as grazing, has affected fire ecology in some portions of the CEA. In general, low intensity, low severity ground fires have become less common in some fuel/vegetation types since Eurpoean settlement. Fire suppression activities, such as drafting water from streams or lakes, has the potential to spread AIS. 3.4.9.4 Recreational Activities Recreational activities occur across the cumulative effects analysis area such as: camping, hunting, fishing, day use activities, and off-road vehicle riding, summer cabins/homes.  Dispersed camping is an ongoing activity that occurs mainly in the summer and early fall months. These camping areas have disturbed small parcels of land potentially increasing sedimentation of aquatic habitat.  Fishing occurs on perennial streams and water bodies within the CEA. The UDWR regulates the fishing limits. Activities associated with fishing can cause sedimentation due to disturbance of stream banks and reservoir shorelines. Historic stocking of non-native fish into CEA waters is one change from pre-settlement conditions. Typical harvest levels do not generally limit stream trout populations at this time and wild self-sustaining populations occur in the streams capable of supporting trout.  Hunting is permitted across the CEA area during specified hunting seasons; the UDWR manages hunting. Mule deer and elk are hunted in three separate seasons (archery, muzzleloader, and general rifle). Herds are managed in accordance to established herd unit objectives. Hunting would have minimal effects on aquatic resources and would not be detrimental to species viability.  Many day use activities occur throughout the CEA area, such as picnicking, sightseeing, antler shed hunting, firewood gathering, horseback riding, etc. Shed hunting has increased significantly during the last 10 years. This activity is generally at lower elevations and generally occurs during late winter and early spring. These activities are short duration by definition and the impacts of such to aquatic biota are minimal. The primary effect of this day use activity and hunting would be off-road vehicle use that might occur near streams, lakes, and riparian habitat, especially on poorly maintained, designed, or user created routes.  Off-road vehicle riding is a popular activity by many local residents and others that come from all over the United States to experience trails open to off-road vehicles. A national all-terrain vehicle (ATV) jamboree occurs annually in September in Sevier County and in the Fillmore area in late June. Both attract 600 to 800 ATV riders to central Utah. There are various ATV trails and non-motorized trails within the CEA. Use statistics show that the amount of ATV use has been increasing over the last 15 years. A few individual companies have special use permits to take people on ATV rides on approved trails. The impacts to aquatics are minimal except where trails are located in riparian areas, near streams or lakes, or actually ford streams. 3.4.9.5 Travel Management The Forest Travel Management Plan (USFS 2012) was updated in an intensive public participation process in association with an environmental impact statement and analysis of alternatives. The travel plan is now in the process of being implemented with signing of routes and closure of unautorized user created routes that were creating resource conflicts. The plan also closed the Forest to cross-country travel off of designated routes. The net effect of implementation of the new plan is reduce the current impacts to aquatic resources form off-road vehicles as well as reducing the potential for future resource degradation from off-road vehicles. 3.4.9.6 Special Uses Special uses occur throughout the CEA area such as: firewood and post cutting, outfitter and guide operations, municipal water developments, small mining claims, irrigation diversions, roads, water lines, etc. Special uses such as these are authorized by Special Use Permits; usually these permits require a separate environmental assessment, which discloses the impacts from these activities. The permits have requirements and are generally managed to have minimal environmental impacts. 3.4.9.7 Water Management Water management structures, canals, and other improvements are permitted as Special Uses and mentioned above. The primary effect has been to alter the amount and timing of water flows in natural channels. The effects to aquatic biota are discussed in the summary below.    3.4.9.8 Summary of Cumulative Effects Bonneville Cutthroat Trout and Resident Trout  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, timber/thinning operations, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition and densities and riparian environments, which has reduced habitat for BVCT and resident trout species in some cases and created habitat in others. In general, stream habitats have generally been reduced in quantity and quality, while large (verses small beaver pond) lake quantity has increased. In addition, across their historic range, BVCT have generally been displaced by non-native trout species. Bonneville cutthroat trout only occur on Monroe Mountain where they have been reintroduced into the Manning Creek drainage. Despite these cumulative effects and concerns, these streams remain an important fisheries resource in the state of Utah, although the true potential biomass for these streams is not known.  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the proposed action to BVCT and resident trout are expected to be of a short to mid-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the no action alternative or one of the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable adverse changes to the species discussed in this report or extrapolated to other aquatic species with similar habitats. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect population numbers or viability of BVCT and resident trout in the long term. Any adverse effects to trout species or trout habitat for future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest through the use of project design features. The activities listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase as a result of the action alternative. (Note - As currently designed, there is risk that 7th field HUC impacts and - of particular concern - debris flows from a debris flow prone subwatersheds could occur following treatment of a high percentage of these particular subwathersheds. It is likely that if these did occur, the trout population would persist in other locations within the 6th field HUC upstream of the confuence with the 7th field subwatershed or in other 7th field HUCs not directly connected to them. These impacts could be considerable where they do occur, however, thus considerable caution has been recommended when conducting these treatments).  Boreal Toad  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, vegetation management, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition, densities, and riparian environments, which has reduced habitat quality for boreal toads in some cases and created habitat or improved habitat quality in other cases. In general, stream habitats have generally been reduced in quantity and quality, and beaver density reduced from pre-European settlement conditions. Despite these cumulative effects and concerns, Monroe Mountain remains a very important area for boreal toad conservation in the state of Utah, although the true historic population size and distribution of boreal toads on Monroe Mountain is not known.  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the proposed action to boreal toads are expected to be of a short-term duration provided that the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus, the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the no action alternative or the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable changes to boreal toads. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect population numbers or viability of boreal toads in the long term. Any adverse effects to aquatic species or aquatic habitat for future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest through the use of project design features. The activities listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase as a result of the action alternative. (Note - As currently designed, there is risk that 7th field HUC impacts and - of particular concern - debris flows from a debris flow prone subwatersheds could occur following treatment of a high percentage of these particular subwathersheds. It is likely that if these did occur, the boreal toad population would persist in other locations within the 6th field HUC upstream of the confuence with the 7th field subwatershed or in other 7th field HUCs not directly connected to them. These impacts could be considerable where they do occur, however, thus considerable caution has been recommended when conducting these treatments).  Aquatic Macroinvertebrates  The introduction of non-native fish, stocking of hatchery fish, grazing, fires, fire management activities, timber/thinning operations, irrigation diversion, and water manipulation has altered riparian and upland vegetation composition and densities and riparian environments, which has affected macroinvertebrates in the cumulative effects area (CEA). Erosion, water manipulation (stream flows), and increased sediment are major factors affecting potentially suitable habitats for aquatic macroinvertebrates.  This has reduced habitat for clean water macroinvertebrate taxa, decreasing their populations and extent, which has an effect of reducing the BCI in most cases. In some cases, it may have improved habitat, raising the BCI. Often an effect of moderate increases in sedimentation and organic enrichment will be an increase in macroinvertebrate biomass and species richness as tolerant taxa become established, although at the expense of the cleanest water taxa which are lost (thus BCI scores will decrease slightly). As enrichment continues, however, biomass and species richness will begin to decline as sediments cover stream substrates and the majority of clean water taxa are eliminated, greatly reducing BCI scores.  As described above, the direct and indirect effects from the proposed action to aquatic macroinvertebrates are expected to be of a short-term duration if the required design features are properly implemented and the project properly administered. Thus the effects of the activities listed above in the cumulative effects section, in combination with either the no action alternative or one of the action alternatives, are not expected to cause long-term measurable changes to the aquatic macroinvertebrate community. None of the alternatives would add cumulative effects that would adversely affect the aquatic macroinvertebrate community structure in the long term. Thus, the monitoring stations sampled would not be expected to decline after the mid-term recovery period in terms of the BCI index rating. Any adverse effects to aquatic species or aquatic habitat for future projects can be avoided or minimized on the National Forest using project design features. The activities listed above in the cumulative effects section are not expected to increase because of one of the action alternatives. (Note - As currently designed, there is risk that 7th field HUC impacts and - of particular concern - debris flows from a debris flow prone subwatersheds could occur following treatment of a high percentage of these particular subwathersheds. It is likely that if these did occur, aquatic macroinvertebrates would persist in other locations within the 6th field HUC upstream of the confuence with the 7th field subwatershed or in other 7th field HUCs not directly connected to them. These impacts could be considerable where they do occur, however, thus considerable caution has been recommended when conducting these treatments).  Determination 3.4.10 and Rationale As a result of this evaluation it is my determination that implementation of any of the action alternatives (Alternatives 2 – 5) for the proposed Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project may impact individuals or habitat, but will not likely contribute to a trend towards Federal listing or cause a loss of viability to the population or species for the sensitive species considered in this document (Table 120)..  Table 120. Determination of impact on the affected sensitive species . SPECIES DETERMINATION Bonneville cutthroat trout MIIH Boreal toad MIIH NI = No Impact MIIH = May Impact Individuals Or Habitat, But Will Not Likely Contribute To A Trend  Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species. WIFV = Will Impact Individuals Or Habitat With A Consequence That The Act ion Will Contribute  To A Trend Towards Federal Listing Or Cause A Loss Of Viability To The Population Or Species. BI = Beneficial Impact   Bonneville cutthroat trout  A determination of May Impact Individuals or Habitat is made for BVCT. See Aquatic Sensitive/MIS Summary (Whelen 2015; appendix F in this EIS) for determination rationale.  Boreal toad  A determination of May Impact Individuals or Habitat is made for boreal toad. See Aquatic Sensitive/MIS Summary (Whelen 2015; appendix F in this EIS) for determination rationale.  Additional 3.4.11 Mitigation Measures 3.4.11.1 Boreal Toad Monitoring Due to the nature of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project - which treats habitat across the majority of the mountain within, adjacent to, and upslope of boreal toad habitat that may affect boreal toad habitat through downstream effects, the recent introduction of chytrid fungus to Monroe Mountain and the likely concurrent population decline, and the fact that boreal toads have been petitioned for listing as a threatened species with a status review scheduled for completion by 2017, active monitoring of boreal toads before, during, and after project implementation is required to meet the MIIH determination by ensuring that project design features are implemented as designed, work as intended and are effective, and that site specific findings of toad use areas, timing, etc. can be incorporated into implementation actions. This monitoring will ensure that boreal toad impacts are minimized and of a scale that ensures the project will not lead towards federal listing. This monitoring has been included in the aquatics design features applicable to all alternatives for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project, and as such, is part of the proposed action.  Current monitoring is not adequate to determine trend (K. Wheeler, UDWR Native Aquatics biologist, email communication July 28, 2014), not to mention survival rates, movements, habitat use, or identification of key habitat features needing protection. UDWR design feature recommendations to the Forest. included the recommendation that “Monitoring of boreal toad populations (in addition to current levels by UDWR) should be implemented to document potential effects of proposed vegetation management. This should include breeding site monitoring to document use and relative densities of populations.” (Appendix D of Whelan 2015; appendix F in this EIS). While the exact nature of the monitoring program has not yet been designed, and needs future interagency coordination and cooperation to determine funding sources, personnel, and responsibilities before it can be finalized, Appendix J in Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) provides an example monitoring plan that would be sufficient to meet this need. It includes project objectives of determining changes in toad use areas, chytrid fungus infection rates/changes, finding key concentration areas such as breeding sites and hibernacula that should be buffered/protected, determining boreal toad use of areas planned for treatment, comparing toad use of treated vs. untreated habitat, and (to the extent possible) determining population size and survival data. AIS control measures and annual reporting requirements are included.  Photos 11 and 12 (following pages): These boreal toad hibernacula would not have been found and identified without the 2003 to 2004 radio tracking study. L – Typical hibernacula along small perennial seep that leads to underground root chamber under spruce/fir just behind the aspen. R – Deep buried root chamber under spruce along a flowing small perennial tributary in spruce/fir conifer habitat. M. Goates in photo. Other identified hibernacula included old beaver dams and burrows under riparian and transitional zone shrubs (see Photo 10).   Photo 11. These boreal toad hibernacula would not have been found and identified without the 2003-2004 radio tracking study. Typical hibernacula along small perennial seep that leads to underground root chamber under spruce/fir just behind the aspen.    Photo 12. Deep buried root chamber under spruce along a flowing small perennial tributary in spruce/fir conifer habitat. M. Goates in photo. Other identified hibernacula included old beaver dams and burrows under riparian and transitional zone shrubs (see Photo 10). 3.4.11.2 Other Aquatics Monitoring General aquatic monitoring has been included in the aquatics design features applicable to all alternatives for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project, and is part of the proposed action. This generally includes monitoring fish populations, stream flow, water turbidity, basic water chemistry, and aquatic macroinvertebrates one time before treatments are conducted, once right at completion of treatments, and one final time 3 to 5 years post treatment. Lake water quality monitoring would be similar, but would have water chemistry samples taken monthly during the summer (no samples during the remainder of the year). Finally, previously established hydrological channel monitoring stations would be repeated once before treatments, once right at the completion of treatments, and once 3 to 5 years post-treatment. This data will help validate design features and lead to better future project design, validate the effects analysis, and generally provide feedback to improve project planning and implementation to reduce aquatic biota impacts on other areas where landscape scale treatments are undertaken. 3.4.11.3 Additional Recommended Actions • The recommendation to conduct an up to date Equivalent Roaded Area (ERA) modeling run just prior to beginning treatments in a HUC6 subwatershed was moved/ has been included in the aquatics design features applicable to all alternatives for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration project, and as such, is part of the proposed action. • Consider subwatershed debris flow prone risk (and secondarily mass wasting and other soil erosion factors) when planning the implementation of specific burning treatments in watersheds with fish bearing streams and/or boreal toad habitat. • Prior to beginning large scale prescribed burning within HUC7 or HUC8 subwatersheds that have been identified as being debris flow prone using the Cannon et al. (2003) model, additional modeling should be conducted using more extensive debris flow prediction techniques such as those in Cannon et al. (2010: Models A, B, or C depending on what soil information is available) or Cannon and DeGraff (2009: page 186 - equations 9.6 and 9.7). These could help determine any potential threshold points and/or appropriate sized treatment areas to achieve desired results while lessening the probability of serious downstream consequences. 3.4.11.4 Recommended Additional Mitigation Measures The following mitigation measures, in addition to the already described design features, are recommended to further reduce impacts to aquatic biota and/or provide monitoring data for adaptive management changes to improve future project design.  • Rest degraded riparian areas adjacent to or below treatment sites prior to the actual treatments to increase riparian plant vigor and mass to help trap and hold sediment. • Disperse treatments across watersheds and time to reduce impacts to aquatic biota. While large treatments are desirable to reduce ungulate browsing to aspen shoots, treating the same total area as a series of smaller areas in several watersheds over several years will likely result in fewer impacts to aquatics then treating a large block in one watershed within one year. • If high erosion potential areas are found in post-implementation inspections, consider silt fence and/or straw-bale check dams within 300 feet of streams or ephemeral delivery channels as needed (similar to existing design feature but focused on streams/channels). • Coordinate project treatments in watersheds containing BVCT with the UDWR southern region fisheries personnel (and vice versa). • As closely as possible follow recommendation of the former Fishlake’s soil scientist for soil water percentages that soil moisture sould be at least 8 to 10 percent water by weight regardless of the season when a unit is burned to protect soil and plant root crowns that can resprout following fire. • Past fire effects studies have often had limited description of fire severities. It is difficult to make quantitiative links between cause and effect without this data. Accurate mapping of the actual treatment areas burned, soil moistures, and associated fire severities in conjunction with the recommended aquatic monitoring listed above will provide data to further develop Forest specific relationships of treatment area/size, location within watersheds, proximity to streams, and fire severity to aquatic biota effects. Such data will aid in planning future vegetation treatment projects in high value aquatic resource watersheds on the Forest.  3.4.12 Compliance with Management Direction/Irreversible or Irretrievable Commitments of Resources There would be no irreversible or irretrievable commitment of habitat associated with selection and implementation of the proposed action that affects threatened, endangered, or candidate aquatic biota.  This process has served to review the effects of implementing the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project on aquatic sensitive and management indicator species of the Fishlake National Forest. Adverse impacts that could affect the long-term viability of these aquatic sensitive and MIS species should be avoided provided the required design features listed above are implemented; thus, the proposed project would meet LRMP standards and guidelines. See Appendix A of Whelan 2015 (appendix F in this EIS) for more information. 3.5 Issue 5 – Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands; and Issue 6 – Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons)  Rocky Mountain 3.5.1 Elk (Cervus elaphus) This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Wildlife Specialist Report (Rasmussen 2015; appendix P in this EIS).  For a detailed description of the live history for elk, refer to Rodriguez 2006. 3.5.1.1 Direct and Indirect Effects Elk habitat occurs across the entire Fishlake National Forest and the project area. There are approximately 1,458,049 acres of potentially suitable habitat on the Fishlake National Forest. Within the Fishlake LRMP II-29, Table II-8B (USFS 1986), the estimated population size of elk on the Fishlake National Forest was 2,000 head in 1986 when the LRMP was signed. Now the estimated population on Monroe according to UDWR as of winter 2013 is 1,300 (Table 121). Helicopter counts are collected on a three-year basis. As a result of habitat improvement projects across the Forest, these data show an increase since 1986 when the plan was signed. The Division of Wildlife Resources collects population data and monitors harvest levels and trends of all big game populations, such as elk.  Big game is an economically important species; hunting demands are high and expected to continue. This area is managed as a trophy bull elk hunt with some variation of spike bull hunts being tried over the past 5 years. Numerous cow tags have been issued in recent years to keep the herd within the respective Herd Management Plan.  Elk can be found throughout the analysis area in spring, summer, and fall periods of the year. The area provides ideal habitat for elk during all important life cycle periods except for winter. The lower elevation portions of the proposed project area are transitional range, which is when big game animals spend time post winter and post summer.  Hiding cover is defined as vegetated areas where brush and trees are tall or dense enough to hide 90 percent of a deer or elk at 200 feet. Foraging habitat is defined as areas that provide an adequate level of browse and non-woody plants for food. Areas of conifer/aspen and solitary aspen communities are especially important for elk calving habitat. These areas can be found throughout the analysis area. Elk prefer habitats where they are least disturbed. Studies have shown that big game avoid areas up to half a mile on each side of a road. This distance depends on topography, vegetation, and vehicle use near the road. Avoidance of these roaded areas decreases the habitat effectiveness in providing for big game needs.  The proposed project area is located at higher elevations that support a majority of summer range conditions for elk. A good balance of forage to cover ratios mixed with randomly dispersed water sources make the area ideal habitat for elk calving and rearing, breeding, and foraging in preparation for winter months. A large portion of the proposed treatment area is in a 4B management stategy according to the LRMP a management concern for MIS. Elk use the entire proposed treatment area. Some areas within the project area are utilized more based on specific habitat components unique to the life cycle of elk. Elk are an economically important species in most all states that have established elk herds. The Monroe elk herd has an important economic value to the local communities. Non-consumptive use provides non hunters or non-permit holders the opportunity to travel to the mountain to view, photograph, listen to, and enjoy elk in a natural wild environment. The number of people that enjoy non-consumptive elk opportunites is greater than the consumptive user. Monroe Mountain Elk Unit is designated as a trophy bull unit where a person has to apply for a chance to draw one of approximatley 30 to 40 tags offered each year for a mature bull elk. In each case a tremendouse amount of money is spent in the local communities for gas, optical equipment, camera equipment, hunting equipment, camping equipment and all associated vehicle costs as well as many other associated costs. For this reason local public support is high to keep an abundant elk herd on the mountain. This support for elk by the public could be counter productive to the project if elk numbers need to be reduced to facilitate the success of aspen recruitment after treatments. It is well documented that elk are attracted to areas that have been burned or mechanically treated and aspen regeneration and recruitment is part of the management objective. Camera trap studies on Monroe Mountain verify elk, deer, cattle and sheep are attracted to aspen regeneration. Elk are new to the mountain in recent decades. They were not introduced to Monroe Mountain but established from neighboring units that had elk re-introduction in the early 1900s. The first elk sightings were in the early 1970s. The UDWR manages the population by limited entry bull hunts, spike only bull hunts, and cow hunts to keep the population within the elk plan level. Changes in hunt timing, location, and permit numbers per elk sex are recommened by the UDWR, presented through the public Regional Advisory Council Process and then made law on an annual basis through the Utah Wildlife Board. This process demonstrates that the Forest Service does not control hunted game species in the State of Utah.  Based on UDWR data current elk populations on Monroe Mountain have trended in the following way:  Table 121. Estimated elk populations on Monroe Mountain Management Unit (UDWR) YEAR POPULATION ESTIMATE 1970’s Few elk sighted, 50 or less 1980’s Roughly 500 animals by end of 1980’s 1982 (first hunt-10 permits) --- 1994 (first helicopter survey) 1,000 1997 809 2000 1,775 2003 1,300 2006 900 2009 1050 2013 1,300 (Modeled Population) 2014 1,250 (Modeled Population) Current Monroe Elk Plan Objective = 1,800  In summary, elk are a MIS supported by the LRMP, a locally important ecological species, a economically important species, a protected hunted population managed by the UDWR through a public process and through a cooperatively signed management plan.  The Monroe Mountain Working Group has developed a “Thresholds Document” that has been included in this document (appendix C). It is designed to provide quantifiable browse thresholds and response options that could occur if browse thresholds are exceeded in treatment areas or if stable aspen stands do not show improvement. This would provide protection of aspen regeneration from ungulate browsing and trigger mechanisms that could come into play if aspen browsing is occurring at unacceptable levels. Opportunities to monitor and manage successful aspen regeneration through the direction of the Thresholds Document would range from livestock use modification, big game hunts targeted at population reductions in target areas, wildlife hazing, wildlife fencing, and others (MMWG 2014). This document has received support from the local Regional Advisory Council and the State Wildlife Board  Direct effects to elk may occur during the implementation period when burning operations may cause some individuals to be burned over. They would also be driven from their cover areas and need to re-located to adjacent areas. Indirectly, elk would compound use on other adjacent areas for cover and forage with other elk. This could cause an over use of forage when compounded by livestock.  Cumulative effects for elk will be considered on National Forest System Lands (excluding Bureau of Land Management administered lands, State, or private) across the entire Monroe Mountain Unit since elk are migratory leaving summer range, transition range, and end up on winter range from November through April (depending length of winter condition).  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the no action alternative were selected, there would be no direct adverse impacts to habitat for late serial species, or improved habitat effectiveness on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under alternative 1, no decrease in immediate habitat effectiveness for elk would occur. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early to mid-seral species to late seral communities. This may create decreases in habitat effectiveness on the quality of elk habitat over time as the variety of vegetation species is reduced as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  The area would likely remain suitable until an uncharacteristic event occurs. The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today. The balance of forage to cover ratios would likely affect usable elk habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. This would cause elk to concentrate (on a short-term basis 2 to 4 years) on other parts of the range, which would compound effects to forage, and space where other elk traditionally occupy.  This type of uncharacteristic wildfire could be stand replacing on such a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and alter the type of forest that exist today providing optimum elk habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. However, if this type of change occurred and the landscape had time to recover for a few years, elk would find the burned area attractive for forage consumption. A lack of cover for elk could be an issue.  Effects of Alternatives 2 through 5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981 to 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In alternative 2, 30 percent of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 37 percent of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 44  Table 122. Vegetation affected by alternatives, percentages, and acres treated compared to the analysis area Compare CEA to Forested Type Mechanical & Associated Slash Burning and Prescribed Fire - Mixed Burn Severities Factoring 60% of the Acres Get Burned Total CEA acres % of CEA proposed     Mixed Conifer----Alt. 2 2,607 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 12,241 31,129 39.3 Stable Aspen 8,820 17,009 51.9 Spruce-Fir 4,313 14,392 30.0 TOTAL 27,981 67,750 41.3 Mixed Conifer---Alt. 3 2,605 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 15,013 31,129 48.2 Stable Aspen 9,497 17,009 55.8 Spruce-Fir 5,348 14,392 37.2 TOTAL 32,461 67,750 47.9 Mixed Conifer---Alt. 4 2,609 5,220 50.0 Seral Aspen 17,150 31,129 55.1 Stable Aspen 10,146 17,009 59.7 Spruce-Fir 6,394 14,392 44.4 TOTAL 36,300 67,750 53.6 Mixed Conifer---Alt.5 2,605 5,220 49.9 Seral Aspen 13,742 31,129 44.1 Stable Aspen 9,406 17,009 55.3 Spruce-Fir 5,191 14,392 36.1 TOTAL 30,944 67,750 45.7  percent for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30 to 44 percent treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2 through 5) (Table 122).  Seral and stable aspen are found within their spring, summer and fall life cycle areas. In alternative 2, 39 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (Table 122).  Elk will calve in an aspen dominated forest type, but will soon train their offspring to use the mixed-conifer and spruce-fir forest types as thermal and hiding cover. A balance of open meadows associated with cover (forested types) is an important combination for elk on the mountain.  Direct impacts for elk will occur when treatments occur. They will be displaced from their traditional summer ranges and have to combine with other elk in other summer range areas on the mountain. This could compress elk use in other areas; however, this would be short-term (less than 5 years) as the sudden response from treatments would improve and increase the summer forage for elk. Hiding cover would be affected to some extent, but with the percentages designed to be left for goshawk foraging areas (40 percent), ample cover should be maintained. Elk depend on a balance of forage to cover ratios to fulfill a balanced life cycle. As stated, as large acres of treatment occur, elk would be displaced to other areas where they would combine use with other elk. This would compound the forage use in the shared area making it problematic to maintain healthy aspen regeneration. A need to reduce elk numbers may be requested from the UDWR to minimize impacts to aspen regeneration. Once the treated areas begin to respond and have re-established a forage base, elk would return and utilize the area once again (less than 5 years). Indirect affects would be realized in other parts of the mountain as elk are dispersed from the treatments. Deer, cattle, and sheep range may be impacted if dispersed elk use their normal summer ranges. However, this would be a short-term issue as the treated areas offered many opportunities for additional forage into the future. This cumulative response would mean a better summer range to raise young, and improve body condition for winter months. 3.5.1.2 Cumulative Effects Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to elk in different ways. We have seen an increase of off-road vehicle traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing, and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear-cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a temporary shift in spring, summer, and fall elk use in the treatment areas. Once the understory has re-established elk find the burned areas very attractive. They have to learn to balance cover areas. Cover areas would be island left un-burned in the mosaic pattern. These should be left unburned to allow a future balance of cover to forage. Hunters are attracted to newly burned areas because big game are attracted to these areas. Increased harvest success would occur in treated areas as well as an increase in wounding loss. Overall, and in the long term of large-scale treatments such as this proposal, as mosaic patterns are part of the design, big game animals are expected to thrive on the mountain.  Cumulative effects for elk will be considered on Forestlands (excluding Bureau of Land Management administered lands, State, or private) across the entire Monroe Mountain Unit since elk are migratory leaving summer range, transition range, and end up on winter range from November through April (depending length of winter condition).  Section 5 of Rasmussen 2015 (appendix P) describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Mule Deer (Odocoileus 3.5.2 hemionus) This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystem Restoration Project Wildlife Specialist Report (appendix P; Rasmussen 2015).  For a detailed description of the life history for mule deer refer to (Rodriguez 2008). 3.5.2.1 Direct and Indirect Effects The UDWR collects post-season population data and monitors harvest levels and population trends of all big game species, such as mule deer. It should be noted that a hunting unit may be within approved herd unit objectives, and because of management strategies, population numbers may be reduced. The current and 5 year projected herd objective for Monroe Mountain is 8,000 deer. The unit is nearing herd unit objective, and active management is in the process of reducing total numbers (Table 123).  Hunting strategies in Utah are made through the Regional Advisory Council and Wildlife Board process. This process has been designed to involve the people in public meetings with a wide range of interests in Utah. Decisions for all hunting season bag limits and season dates are rendered based on political as well as biological input. This process demonstrates that the Forest Service does not control hunted game species in the State of Utah. Population fluctuations are the result of numerous influences including drought, cold winters, increased predation from large mammals, and habitat modifications and degradation. Although the numbers of young are recruited into the population are on a decline, the data show an increase in mature bucks into the population as well as an increase in buck to doe ratios.  The proposed project area is located at higher elevations that support summer range conditions for deer. A good balance of forage to cover ratios mixed with randomly dispersed water sources make the area ideal habitat for deer fawining and rearing, some deer rutting, and foraging in preparation for winter months.  A large portion of the proposed treatment area is in a 4B management stategy according to the LRMP. Cumulative effects for deer are discussed in the cumulative effects section.  The Utah Division of Wildlife Resoures data (1938 to present) on Monroe Mountain are shown in Table 123.  Table 123. Estimated deer population on Monroe Mountain Management Unit (UDWR) YEAR BUCK HARVEST POPULATION EST. 1938 356 2,700 1941 823 6,300 1950 815 6,300 1960 2,000 15,400 1970 1,600 12,300 1980 1,161 8,900 1992 871 6,700 2000 1,031 7,900 2010 252 4,900 2013  7,800 2014  7,300 Current Monroe Deer Plan Objective = 8,000  Figure 85 shows post-season trend data of deer populations in Central Utah (Sevier, Piute, Wayne, So. Sanpete). This chart shows buck to doe ratios and fawn to doe ratios. Data shows that buck to doe ratios are at an almost 30 year peak as well as fawn to doe ratios.  Annual deer monitoring data has been gathered by the UDWR, Bureau of Land Management, and the Forest. Figure 84 and Figure 85 represent data gathered by the Bureau of Land Management and Forest. The need to gather deer (MIS) data by Federal agencies is connected to their respective land management plans.  Post season deer data is gathered during the rut period (mid November-December) and when deer have migrated from the higher elevations to “transition” and “winter range” areas. A more accurate count is obtained during this time when deer are more concentrated and the highest number of bucks are found with the doe and fawn groups. Since the proposed project is designed in the higher elveations of Monroe Mountain, which is considered summer range, no winter range areas should be affected by the project. The UDWR has mapped deer winter range habitat for Monroe Mountain which is diplayed in Figure 86.  Direct effects to deer may occur during the implementation period when burning operations may cause some individuals to be burned over. They would also be driven from their cover areas and need to re-located to adjacent areas. Indirectly deer would compound use on other adjacent areas for cover and forage with other deer.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the no action alternative were selected, there would be no direct adverse impacts to habitat for late serial species, or improved habitat effectiveness on population numbers or viability of this species.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under alternative 1, no decrease in immediate habitat effectiveness for deer would occur. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may create decreases in habitat effectiveness on the quality of deer habitat over time as the variety of vegetation species is reduced as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Direct effects to deer may occur during the implementation period when burning operations may cause some individuals to be burned over. They would also be driven from their cover areas and need to re-located to adjacent areas. Indirectly deer would compound use on other adjacent areas for cover and forage with other deer.  Effects of Alternative 1 - No Action  If the no action alternative were selected, there would be no direct adverse impacts to habitat for late serial species, or improved habitat effectiveness on population numbers or viability of this species.  7000 8000 9000 10000 11000 12000 13000 14000 15000 Deer Population Trend #29 Southwest Manti, #43 Salina-Boobe Hole, #44 Fishlake, #48 Monroe Mountain, #49 Marysvale-Circleville # 22 Spring Vehicle Count Routes Deer No.  Figure 84. Deer trend data for central Utah including Monroe Mountain (Greenwood 2014)     0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 DEER POSTSEASON TREND #29 Southwest Manti, #43 Salina-Boobe Hole, #44 Fishlake, #48 Monroe Mountain, #49 Marysvale-Circleville 50 Winter Vehicle Count Routes Fawns / 100 Does Bucks / 100 Does  Figure 85. Deer post-season trend data for central Utah including Monroe Mountain (Greenwood 2013)  Figure 84 shows spring trend data of deer populations in Central Utah (Sevier, Piute, Wayne, So. Sanpete). According to these data deer have peaked on an average of every 10 years.  Since there would be no vegetation treatments under alternative 1, no decrease in immediate habitat effectiveness for deer would occur. Potential indirect effects may come from natural succession events as the areas move from early/mid seral species to late seral communities. This may create decreases in habitat effectiveness on the quality of deer habitat over time as the variety of vegetation species is reduced as conifer continues to expand into aspen communities resulting in a lack of habitat diversity.  Figure 86. Deer winter range on Monroe Mountain.   The area would likely remain suitable until an uncharacteristic event occurs. The area would likely remain susceptible to wildfire. A wildfire would likely occur during the summer months when the area impacted could be larger, without a broken mosaic pattern. In addition, the severity could be high and plant recovery and re-establishment may take longer. This type of uncharacteristic wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it could create areas of even age forest succession and be different than the type of forest that exist today. The balance of forage to cover ratios would likely affect usable deer across the landscape of Monroe Mountain. This would cause deer to concentrate (on a short-term basis 2 to 4 years) on other parts of Monroe Mountain, which would compound effects to forage, and space where other deer traditionally occupy.  This type of wildfire could be stand replacing on a large scale that it would create an even age forest succession and alter the type of forest that exist today providing optimum deer habitat across the landscape of Monroe Mountain; however, if this type of change occurred and the landscape had time to recover for a few years, deer would find the burned area attractive for forage consumption. A lack of cover would become an issue with fewer trees per acre.  Effects of Alternatives 2 through 5 - Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning  Alternatives 2, 3, 4, and 5 all consist of a combination of mechanical forestry practices and prescribed fire. Mechanical treatments and/or prescribed burning proposed range from 27,981 to 36,300 acres. The total number of acres of conifer bearing acres is 18,877. Of these acres a mix of spruce and firs are combined. In alternative 2, 30 percent of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 37 percent of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 44 percent of spruce-fir is proposed for treatment, and in alternative 5, 36 percent of spruce/fir is proposed for treatment. Of mixed-conifer acres in the proposed area 30 to 44 percent treatment is proposed through the action alternatives (2 through 5) (percentages taken from spreadsheet Table 122, a comparison of the proposed treatment acres by forest type against the total acres of forest type).  Seral and stable aspen are found within their spring, summer and fall life cycle areas. In alternative 2, 39 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 48 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment , in alternative 4, 55 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 44 percent of seral aspen is proposed for treatment. As for stable aspen, in alternative 2, 51 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 3, 56 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment, in alternative 4, 60 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment and in alternative 5, 55 percent of stable aspen is proposed for treatment (Table 122)  Deer will fawn in an aspen-mountain brush dominated forest type, but will soon train their offspring to use the aspen, mixed-conifer and spruce-fir forest types as thermal and hiding cover. A balance of open meadows associated with cover (forested types) is an important combination for deer on the mountain.  Direct impacts for deer will occur when treatments occur. Deer studies on Monroe Mountain indicate that most of the fawning occurs on the fringe areas of the Forest (Freeman et al. 2014). They will be displaced from their traditional summer ranges and have to combine with other deer in other summer range areas on the mountain. This could compress deer use in other areas. However, this would be short-term (less than 5 years) as the sudden response from treatments would improve and increase the summer forage for deer. Hiding cover would be affected to some extent, but with the percentages designed to be left for goshawk foraging areas (40 percent), ample cover should be maintained. Indirect affects would be realized in other parts of the mountain as deer are dispersed from the treatments. Elk, cattle, and sheep range may be impacted if dispersed deer used their normal summer ranges. However, this would be a shortterm (less than 5 years) issue, as the treated areas would offer many opportunities for additional forage into the future. This cumulative response would mean a better summer range to raise young, and improve body condition for winter months. 3.5.2.2 Cumulative Effects Past, present and future activities in forested areas on Monroe Mountain may cause disturbance to deer in different ways. We have seen an increase of off-road vehicle traffic, camping, hunting, sightseeing, and private land development, on Monroe Mountain. We have seen an increase in mechanical treatments, natural and prescribed fire that have changed the density and patch size of older age aspen-mixed conifer on the mountain. Some recent work has been done to clear-cut, thin, or burn mixed conifer to stimulate aspen regeneration. Some of these recent treatments have caused a temporary shift in spring, summer, and fall deer use in the treatment areas. Once the understory has re-established, deer find the burned areas very attractive. They have to learn to balance cover areas. Cover areas would be islands left un-burned in the mosaic pattern. These should be left unburned to allow a future balance of cover to forage. Hunters are attracted to newly burned areas because big game are attracted to these areas. Increased harvest success would occur in treated areas as well as an increase in wounding loss. Overall, and in the long term of large scale treatments such as this proposal, as mosaic patterns are part of the design, big game animals are expected thrive on the mountain.  Section 5 of Rasmussen 2015 (appendix P) describes the cumulative effects area, it’s size, relationship with the actual analysis area and the rational behind the selection of the boundaries. The section also decscribes past,present, reasonably foreseeable projects and vegetative projects or fires that have occurred on Monroe Mountain. Also explained are “other” activities that have been known to or do occur on the mountain. All these activities may or may not have an effect on wildlife species that use the mountain at some part of their life cycle.  Domestic Ungulates (3.5.3 Cattle (Bos taurus) and Sheep (Ovis aries)) This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). 3.5.3.1 Methodology for Analysis This analysis will examine the current vegetation condition and the desired vegetation condition on Monroe Mountain. It will identify the gap between the two conditions and will analyze the proposed alternatives and the design features of the alternatives to determine the effects that each alternative would have on the rangeland resources on Monroe Mountain.  The analysis will discuss the acres to be treated by alternative and includes a simple analysis on the value of forage for livestock grazing.  The environmental indicators to be measured are:  1. The number of acres to be treated or disturbed by alternative. 2. The percentage of the historical aspen ecosystem acres on Monroe Mountain to be treated. 3. The percentage of National Forest System (NFS) Land on Monroe Mountain to be treated. 4. An estimated cost per Animal Unit Month (AUM).  There are slight differences in the number of acres to be treated in the alternatives. The percentage of the historical aspen ecosystem acres to be treated by each alternative gives a reference of how much of the historical aspen will be treated. The percentage of NFS lands on Monroe Mountain to be treated provides a big picture view of just how much of Monroe Mountain will be treated by the project for cumulative effects purposes.  The estimated cost per AUM measure provides an insight of the impact to the permittees from resting treated areas. 3.5.3.2 Environmental Indicators The environmental indicators to be measured are:  1. The number of acres to be treated or disturbed by alternative. 2. The percentage of the historical aspen ecosystem acres on Monroe Mountain to be treated. 3. The percentage of National Forest System land on Monroe Mountain to be treated. 4. An estimated cost per AUM.  There are slight differences in the number of acres to be treated in the alternatives. The percentage of the historical aspen ecosystem acres to be treated by each alternative gives a reference of how much of the historical aspen will be treated. The percentage of National Forest System lands on Monroe Mountain to be treated provides a big picture view of just how much of Monroe Mountain will be treated by the project for cumulative effects purposes.  The estimated cost per AUM measure provides an insight of the impact to the permittees from resting treated areas. 3.5.3.3 Affected Environment Existing Condition  The Fishlake National Forest (FNF) manages 1.7 million acres of National Forest System (NFS) land of which more than 1,036,000 acres are rangelands. There are 74 designated grazing allotments managed by the Forest. Livestock are trailed to and from forest grazing allotments in early summer and fall. There are numerous structural (water trough, pipelines, fences, corrals, etc.) and nonstructural (seedings, chainings, prescribed burns, etc.) range improvements on the forest associated with these allotments. Many of these range improvements provide water and forage for wildlife as well as livestock.  This aspen ecosystems restoration project focuses on restoring aspen on Monroe Mountain with mechanical and prescribed burn treatments in the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce-fir cover types. Monroe Mountain is located in south-central Utah, south of Richfield, west of Koosharem, and east of Marysvale. It encompasses approximately 175,705 acres of NFS lands administered by the Fishlake National Forest - Richfield Ranger District, and approximately 11,805 acres of private inholdings. It is divided into 11 livestock grazing allotments. The proposed action is to implement treatments designed to restore aspen on 10 of the allotments. The 10 affected allotments are divided into 33 pastures/units.  Aspen is a keystone species and historically was a landscape dominant on Monroe Mtn. Aspen is an early successional tree species (sun loving and shade intolerant). Individual aspen trees arise almost exclusively from root suckers. Aspen sprouts heavily following disturbance and is relatively short-lived (i.e., 100-200 years). As it matures natural selection, self-thinning, and competition from other tree species work to reduce and replace aspen with late successional vegetation. Without some kind of a disturbance (i.e. fire or logging) aspen will eventually be replaced by late successional species. Grazing of aspen by animals tends to speed up the succession process because some of the aspen seedlings do not survive after being grazed. Stable aspen is not replaced by late successional species, but in the lack of disturbance to stimulate it to sprout, the aspen may die.  Range conditions on Monroe Mountain are different today than they were before Euro-American settlement. Changes in human uses (grazing, timber harvests, recreation, water use, etc.), disturbance regimes (fire, insects, etc.), climatic conditions, and wildlife species density have led to a decline in aspen and an increase in conifer species. Of the 175,705 National Forest Service acres on Monroe Mountain, aspen historically occurred on approximately 71,000 acres. Aspendominated cover currently occurs on approximately 17,009 acres. Much of this aspen dominated cover has a component of mixed conifer in the understory (primarily subalpine fir (Abies lasiocarpa)). Approximately 31,129 acres are dominated by seral aspen; much of this seral aspen co-exists with mixed conifer (primarily subalpine fir). Approximately 5,210 acres on Monroe Mountain are dominated by mixed conifer (Engelmann spruce, Douglas fir, ponderosa pine, and white fir (A. concolor)). Much of this mixed conifer co-exists with aspen. Approximately 13,667 acres are dominated by spruce/fir with an aspen component. Approximately 43,877 acres in the project area are dominated by sagebrush cover types (primarily big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata)), some (approximately 12,231 acres) of which may have been aspen communities in the recent past. Dominance by sagebrush is not a successional pathway for aspen; however, in the absence of recruitment, aspen can be replaced with shrub cover types. These sagebrush-dominated communities still have some scattered aspen trees/stands.  These changes have resulted in a smaller forage base for livestock and wildlife. Charles Kay (2003) reported that, “On average, aspen communities produce around 2,000 pounds of air-dried forage per acre, while conifers typically produce 150 pounds or less (Muggler 1988). Historically, there were over 300,000 acres of aspen on the Fishlake National Forest, but today, aspen occupies only about 150,000 acres (Bartos and Campbell 1998). As aspen communities have been converted to conifers, approximately 150,000 Animal Unit Months (AUMs) have been lost on the Fishlake.”  In 2008, Stam et al. (2008) reported that conifer cover affected aspen understory biomass in a major way in studies done on the Cedar City Ranger District of the Dixie National Forest, the Richfield Ranger District of the Fishlake National Forest, and private land on Cedar Mountain east of Cedar City, Utah. Their 2003 data showed a range of 1482 kilograms per hectare-1 at 0 (zero) percent conifer cover to a low of 10 kilograms per hectare-1 at 60 percent conifer cover. They quoted Mueggler, “Production can reportedly be reduced by 50 percent when conifers make up as little as 15 percent of the total tree basal area on the site (Mueggler 1985 and 1988).”  In a 2004 study titled Quantifying Losses of Understory Forage in Aspen Stands on the Dixie and Fishlake National Forests, by Stam et al. (2004), they reported approximately 10 million to 13 million dollars in additional revenue could be realized if historic aspen sites on the Dixie and Fishlake National Forests had not experienced reduced forage production because of conifer encroachment. This revenue would only be realized by livestock producers if additional forage were allocated totally to livestock grazing. They also reported that the additional grazing capacity could generate as much as $309,297.00 in the current year alone in livestock grazing fees for the two forests, if it was all allocated to livestock.  Historically, cattle and sheep use on Monroe Mountain was much higher than current use (Figure 5). Cattle and sheep use began in the late 1800s, and peaked around 1910 with use of about 23,000 AUMs. There was a steep decline (about three-fold) in livestock AUM use on Monroe Mountain reaching a low in the 1960s and 1970s of about 7,700 AUMs. Cattle use declined since 1910 by about 10,000 AUMs and sheep use about 6,700 AUMs. Livestock use has remained flat since the 1950s. Although Figure 5 shows total AUMs in 2014 are similar to total AUMs in 1910, the 1910 AUMs displayed in Figure 5 are likely conservative because mule deer AUMs are not included. In 1910, the AUMs were cattle and sheep while in 2014 the AUMs were cattle, sheep, deer, and elk. All these animals browse aspen.  Historical deer use is particularly hard to estimate, but using harvest data as a surrogate, mule deer use increased from 1930 reaching a peak of about 21,000 AUMs in the 1960s. Mule deer use has declined since the 1960s to about 9,100 AUMs today. Certainly, the number of deer in central Utah is nowhere near the peak numbers of the 1960s.  Elk use of Monroe Mountain appears much heavier than historically. Old-time residents of the region can recall seeing their first elk on Monroe Mountain in the 1960s. Using winter counts as a basis to estimate, elk AUMs have increased from 0 (zero) in the 1960s to a peak of about 9,100 AUMs in 2000 and about 6,300 in 2014.  Noxious weeds and invasive species (ex. cheatgrass) management are a big concern on rangelands managed by the Forest. Various weed and vegetation treatments have been implemented to control the spread of noxious weeds and invasive species. There have not been large infestations of noxious weeds identified on Monroe Mountain. No noxious weeds are known to occur where prescribed fire or mechanical treatments are proposed.  Desired Condition  Aspen communities are persistent with multi-aged stems and adequate recruitment. Aspen ecosystems contain a variety of age classes and structural components distributed across the landscape (Table 2 and Table 3). Aspen systems regain dominance, reclaimed mainly from Engelmann spruce/subalpine fir, and mixed conifer types accompanied by marked increases in understory vegetation and groundcover. Conifers occupy less than 15 percent of the canopy (Campbell and Bartos 2001). Mature and old aspen stands comprise about 40 percent of the structural class distribution. Young aspen comprise about 20 percent of the structural class distribution (Table 3). Dominant aspen trees are generally less than 100 years old. Other age classes are evenly distributed between early, young, and mid-age classes. Diverse aspen conditions support a large variety of animals. Associated herbaceous and woody vegetation are highly variable. Perennial grasses and forbs dominate the understory areas with a range of shrub cover resulting in minimal bare ground within aspen systems. Site productivity generally determines individual stand densities. Aspen regeneration success is achieved through an integrated sprout protection program (see appendix C). Fire regimes are adequate to perpetuate aspen, particularly in areas seral to conifer.  Stable aspen is a term used to describe aspen stands in which conifer trees play little or no role. The stable aspen stands were classified into three broad categories based upon the density of living canopy trees. In addition to the dominant canopy trees, aspen recruits (greater than 12 feet tall but clearly below the dominant canopy), aspen saplings (6 to 12 feet tall and at low risk to being top-browsed), and aspen sprouts (less than 6 feet tall and at relatively high risk to being top-browsed) are also generally present.  Data was collected from 58 stable aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. The stands were divided into the following categories listed in order of decreasing health full (F) for fully self-replacing; transitional (T), with recruitment levels that are borderline to those necessary for selfreplacement; marginal (M), where recruitment is happening but at a level that might not be sufficient for self-replacement; and non-self-replacing (N) where recruitment is not happening, or is at a level that is clearly too low to maintain the stand through time. The stands were then further classified by the density of the canopy trees. The categories for canopy density are greater than 1,000 canopy trees per acre high density Stable Aspen Class 1 (SA1), low density Stable Aspen Class 2 (SA2) with canopy tree densities of less than 200 trees per acre, and intermediate-density Stable Aspen Class (SA3) is defined by a density of 200 to 1000 canopy trees per acre. Overall, in 2013, 11 of 58 (19 percent) stable aspen stands were classified as fully self-replacing, 5 (9 percent) as transitional, 13 (22 percent) as marginal and 29 (50 percent) as non-self-replacing (Table 4). To move towards the desired conditions of having persistent aspen communities, with multi-height stems and adequate recruitment to perpetuate the aspen communities, the desire is for the stable aspen stands to be in SA1, SA2-F, or SA3-F; therefore, 79 percent (47 stands) of the stable aspen stands need to improve. 3.5.3.4 Environmental Consequences This aspen ecosystem restoration project focuses on restoring aspen on Monroe Mountain with mechanical and prescribed burn treatments in the aspen, mixed conifer, and spruce/fir cover types. The cumulative effects boundary for this analysis will be the area considered as Monroe Mountain (Figure 1). There are five alternatives being considered for detailed analysis. The acres to be treated under the alternatives range from 0 (zero) under alternative 1 (no action) to 47,274 acres under alternative 4 (Table 44 and Table 124). These tables also show the miles of temporary roads that are proposed for each alternative.  Table 124. Alternative comparison table for livestock grazing Alternative Acres on Monroe Mountain Treated/ Disturbed % of Historical Aspen on Monroe Mountain Treated % of NFS Land on Monroe Mountain Treated Alternative 1 0 0% 0% Alternative 2 41,177 58% 23% Alternative 3 45,004 63% 26% Alternative 4 47,274 67% 27% Alternative 5 41,525 58% 24%  The expected timeframe to implement this project is 10 years, minimum. The scale and timing of the mechanical and prescribed fire treatments are likely to affect the level of impacts that both wild and domestic grazers have on aspen response to treatments. Under all of the alternatives, most of the rangeland resources will continue to be managed as they are currently being managed with pasture rotations based on utilization standards. Appendix C shows how many acres would be treated in each grazing allotment by pasture under each alternative and the percent of the pasture that it represents. There will be a temporary loss of vegetation when areas are treated and temporary roads are built and used. After areas are treated, they will be rested from livestock grazing for two to three growing seasons to allow the vegetation some recovery time. It is expected that diversity and amount of understory vegetation in conifer/aspen stands will improve as the treatments are completed. AspenEcoFigure 87. Aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain Figure 88. Aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain  The rest from livestock grazing will be a work in progress depending on the specifics and timing of the individual treatments. The treatments may require anything in between entire allotments being rested, to a very small portion of an allotment needing rest. Grazing rotations will be modified, as needed, which may result in not following existing rest or deferment schedules for a limited time (i.e. 1 to 3 years).  Herding and temporary electric fences can help minimize the effects to the permittees brought on by the required rest period after treatment. If these are ineffective, then complete rest of the allotment/pasture would be considered. The planning and implementation of livestock grazing rest for treatment areas will require a solid working relationship between the Forest Service and livestock grazing permittees. This working relationship will play a key role in the success of this aspen restoration project.  Wildlife will still be grazing treatment areas after they are treated. This continued wildlife grazing presents a risk to aspen recovery following treatments. To address this risk, the District is proposing quantifiable browsing thresholds and response options to aid in accomplishing desired conditions. See the overview of the proposed action section of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) and appendix C for details.  Any time vegetation is treated or soil is disturbed on the forest there is a risk of noxious weed establishment. Currently there are no noxious weeds known to occur in the proposed treatment areas and there are weed related design features to help minimize the potential effects (see the design features in chapter 2).  WhiteLedgetreatFigure 89. Unsuccessful treatment on Monroe Mountain. There is no aspen regeneration left because it was grazed off.  Alternative 1 - No Action The no action alternative is to continue with the current management. This alternative does not address the stated purpose and need of the project as described above. Under this alternative 0 (zero) acres of the aspen ecosystems targeted in this project would be treated. The most likely time aspen disturbance would occur is during a wildfire event or until a NEPA analysis is completed to authorize the treatment of aspen.  Direct Effects  Consequences of this alternative are continued degradation of the aspen ecosystem and continued loss of understory habitat and forage. Aspen dominated acres are expected to decline without disturbance to remove competition and stimulate the aspen to regenerate. This decline in aspen will reduce the forage that is available for livestock.  Indirect Effects  Continued livestock and wildlife grazing will speed up the rate of aspen decline (succession) as aspen sprouts are grazed. This could lead to a need to reduce livestock grazing as the carrying capacity of the land changes.  Cumulative Effects  A list of the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable projects on Monroe Mountain has been assembled and is attached in appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). Many of those projects are vegetation manipulation projects. Usually there is a short-term loss of vegetation associated with vegetation projects followed by an increase in rangeland vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen). Rangeland resources benefit from the increased vegetation. The increase in vegetation provides more forage for grazing animals, which reduces the intensity and frequency of grazing on the plants. It also provides beneficial ecological effects such as plant species diversity, plant age class diversity, and decreased bare ground, etc.  Other projects listed in appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) include projects to manage livestock grazing. Effects of grazing (from livestock and wildlife) have played a part of Monroe Mountain’s history and the aspen ecosystem decline. Grazing of aspen sprouts tends to speed up vegetation succession from early seral aspen plant communities to late seral (conifer) communities. Grazing will continue to play a role in the future condition of Monroe Mountain as wildlife use the forest and livestock are permitted to graze on the forest.  Aspen ecosystems on Monroe Mountain are still declining despite numerous small-scale past vegetation treatments (mechanical and prescribed fire). The Forest has not been able to do large enough vegetation treatments and control ungulate grazing on the treatment areas to improve the aspen ecosystems on the Monroe Mountain landscape (Figure 87). The cumulative effects of the no action alternative added to the lack of large-scale vegetation manipulation projects in the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future increases the risk of losing the aspen ecosystem from Monroe Mountain entirely. Approximately 76 percent of the historic aspen ecosystem acres have already been lost or is experiencing a conversion of dominant cover type (Campbell and Bartos 2001; Figure 88 and Figure 89). Appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) indicates that presently and in the foreseeable future approximately 28 percent of the National Forest acres on Monroe Mountain will be treated if the no action alternative is chosen.  Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources  Losing the aspen ecosystems entirely because of no action (no treatment, reduced recruitment, continued grazing, and succession) would be an irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources.  Alternatives 2 through 5 (Actions Applicable all Action Alternatives)  Under all the alternatives there are two monitoring options being considered to complement the established and already on going monitoring of aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. These monitoring options are expected to give better understanding of wildlife use of treated areas in the absence of livestock grazing. The first option being considered is a proposal to rest the 4,212 acre Dairies pasture of the Koosharem Allotment for the duration of this project, 10 years. The permittees on the Koosharem Allotment would have to get through the implementation of this project with seven pastures instead of eight. Approximately 782 acres would be treated in the Dairies Pasture under alternatives 2 through 5. Additional acres in the Dairies pasture have been or are currently being treated under the Box Creek Fuels Reduction Project. Loss of this pasture could result in large impacts to the permittees on the Koosharem Allotment if the other pastures do not have enough forage for their livestock. The second monitoring option is to have six exclosures, which would rest 575 acres on five grazing allotments for the duration of this project, 10 years (see Table 11). This option would rest 3,637 fewer acres and would spread it across five allotments instead of one allotment. It allows the exclosures to be placed in different types of wildlife range (summer, transitional, winter) and on different kinds of livestock grazing allotments (cattle, sheep). This option also increases the number of permittees sharing the impacts of resting the monitored locations and reduces the impact to individual permittees. Some fencing will need to be done to implement this option. Approximately 2.5 miles of livestock fence would be built to implement this option. Ground disturbance associated with this fence installation would be approximately 2.4 acres.  (2.5 .................... . 5,280 ............ ....) . 8 ............ .... 43,560 ............ .... ≈ 2.4 ....................  Temporary fencing (approximately 7.2 miles) would be installed around Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake to enclose 633 acres. This fence would be approximately 8 feet tall and constructed with net wire, t-post, and wooden post. Maintenance of the temporary fence would occur for 4 to 6 years until the aspen sprouts are greater than 6 feet tall, after which the fence would be removed. Ground disturbance associated with this fence would be between approximately 2 and 7 acres depending on the width of the disturbance needed to put up the fence:  (7.2 .................... . 5,280 ............ ....) . 2 ............ .... ........ ................ ........ ........ ............ 43,560 ............ .... ≈ 2 ....................  (7.2 .................... . 5,280 ................ ) . 8 ............ .... ........ ................ ........ ........ ............ 43,560 ............ .... ≈ 7 ....................  One of the treatment options considered for the mechanical treatments is to thin conifer up to 8 inch DBH from below within IRAs and draft UUAs. This option would leave conifer trees that are greater than 8 inch DBH in the stand so conifers would continue to make up part of the basal area of the stand. The increase in early seral plants (biomass/forage) after treatment will be reduced, because the larger conifers are left and make up part of the basal area in the stand. The treatment may have a shorter lifespan because the larger conifer trees that are left continue to grow and shade the ground. If the trees that are left are affected by bark beetles, the shading effect might not be as bad, and the trees might eventually fall and break down opening the canopy so aspen and understory plants could increase. Stam et al. (2008) reported that conifer cover affected aspen understory biomass in a major way. They cited Mueggler, “Production can reportedly be reduced by 50 percent when conifers make up as little as 15 percent of the total tree basal area on the site (Mueggler 1985, 1988).”  Alternative 2  This alternative is to treat 41,177 acres of Monroe Mountain with a combination of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments. This alternative would include 8,186 acres of mechanical and 32,991 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 8.8 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. Approximately 2.4 acres are disturbed for each mile of road constructed (15 feet road width, 20 feet disturbance width):  (20 ............ .... .................... ............ ............ ................ . . 5,280 ............ .... ............ ................) 43,560 ............ .... ............ ................ ≈ 2.4 .................... ............ ................  About 21 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction.  This alternative would allow the treatment of the least amount of acres of any of the alternatives excluding the no action alternative.  Direct Effects  The direct effects of Alternative 2 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a shortterm loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen), and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (chapter 2).  When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post-implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas.  Indirect Effects  The short-term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of AUMs. The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years, which would be treating about 4,100 acres per year.  Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost, permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally, finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is only $1.35 per AUM. If permittees have to feed hay, the cost could be about $90 per AUM:  900 ........................ ........ ................ ........ ........ ........................ ............ 1 ............ 2000 ........................ ........ ......... (1 ............ ) . $200 ............ ............ ........ ......... ≈ $90 ............ 1 ............  Impacts to the permittees would be minimized using herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue.  Cumulative Effects  A list the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). Most of the projects identified in this appendix are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been with fire (prescribed fire and wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment that will be used to treat most of the acres included in all the alternatives.  The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) also shows that approximately 49,000 (28 percent of National Forest Service acres on Monroe Mountain) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 through 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 2 would treat almost that many acres (41,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a 10-year period 4,100 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates.  Alternative 2 is a large-scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 58 percent of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative:  41,177 .................... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 71,000 .................... ........ ..................................... .................... ................. ........ ≈ 0.58 (........ 58 ............................ )  The thought behind this large-scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals will not overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem.  This 41,177 acres represents 23 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain:  41,177 .................... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 175,705 .................... ........ ........................ .... ............................ ≈ 0.23 (........ 23 ............................ )  When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 2 would have on the environment is that approximately 51 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions.  Alternative 3  Under this alternative 45,004 acres will be treated which is 3,827 (9 percent) more acres of aspen treatment than Alternative 2. Alternative 3 would include 13,647 acres of mechanical and 31,357 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 8.8 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. About 21 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction.  Direct Effects  The direct effects of proposed alternative 3 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short-term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen), and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see project design features in chapter 2).  When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas.  Indirect Effects  The short-term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of AUMs. The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years, which would be treating about 4,500 acres per year.  Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost, permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is only $1.35 per AUM. If permittees have to feed hay, the cost could be about $90 per AUM (see equation above). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized with herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue.  Cumulative Effects  A list the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). Most of the projects identified in this appendix are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been with fire (prescribed fire and wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment that will be used to treat most of the acres included in alternative 3.  The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) also shows that approximately 49,000 (28 percent of National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 through 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 3 would treat almost that many acres (45,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a 10-year period 4,500 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates.  Alternative 3 is a large-scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 63 percent of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative:  45,004 ................ .... .................... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 71,000 .................... ........ ................................. .................... ................. ........ ≈ 0.63 (........ 63 ............................ )  The thought behind this large-scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals will not overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem.  This 45,004 acres represents 26 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain:  45,004 .................... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 175,705 .................... ........ ........................ .................... ............ ≈ 0.26 (........ 26 ............................ )  When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that alternative 3 would have on the environment is that approximately 54 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions.  Alternative 4  Alternative 4 is to treat 47,274 acres of Monroe Mountain with a combination of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments. Of the five alternatives being analyzed, this alternative proposes the most acres for treatment. It includes 6,097 (15 percent) more acres for treatment than alternative 2. This alternative would include 19,838 acres of mechanical and 27,436 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 13.3 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. About 32 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction.     Direct Effects  The direct effects of proposed alternative 4 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short-term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen), and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see project design features in chapter 2).  When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas.  Indirect Effects  The short-term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of AUMs. The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years, which would be treating about 4,700 acres per year.  Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost, permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is only $1.35 per AUM. If permittees have to feed hay, the cost could be about $90 per AUM (see equation above). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized with herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue.  Cumulative Effects  A list the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). Most of the projects identified in this appendix are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been with fire (prescribed fire and wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment that will be used to treat most of the acres included in all the alternatives.  The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) also shows that approximately 49,000 (28 percent of National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 through 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 4 would treat almost that many acres (47,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a ten-year period 4,700 acres per year. Browse thresholds and response options are also proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates.  Alternative 4 is a large-scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 67 percent of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative:  47,274 ................ .... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 71,000 .................... ........ ..................................... .................... ................. ........ ≈ 0.67 (........ 67 ............................ )  The thought behind this large-scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals would not overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem.  This 47,247 acres represents 27 percent of the National Forests System acres on Monroe Mountain:  47,247 .................... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 175,705 .................... ........ ........................ ................................ ≈ 0.27 (........ 27 ............................ )  When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 4 would have on the environment is that approximately 55 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions.  Alternative 5  Alternative 5 is to treat 41,525 acres of Monroe Mountain with a combination of mechanical and prescribed fire treatments. The acres treated by alternative 5 are slightly higher (1 percent) than the acres treated under alternative 2 the difference lies in the amount of mechanical treatment compared to the amount of prescribed fire treatment. This alternative would include 15,072 acres of mechanical and 26,453 acres of prescribed fire treatments. There would be 12.8 miles of temporary road construction under this alternative. About 31 acres would be disturbed for temporary road construction.    Direct Effects  The direct effects of proposed alternative 5 treatments on the rangelands of Monroe Mountain are a short-term loss of vegetation followed by an increase in early seral vegetation (grasses, forbs, shrubs, and aspen), and vegetative diversity. To control the amount of vegetation lost at one time and allow for recovery of treated areas before more acres are treated, restrictions on the amount of a HUC 6 that can be treated at one time and grazing rest are design features of this alternative (see project design features in chapter 2).  When vegetation is removed and ground is disturbed for temporary road construction and mechanical treatments there is an increased risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment. To reduce the risk of invasive plant and noxious weed establishment equipment would be washed and inspected, prior to entering National Forest System lands, to remove any soil and debris that may contribute to the spread of noxious weeds. Treatment areas would be monitored post implementation. If noxious and/or invasive weeds were detected, the District would take the appropriate actions to control spread and eliminate the noxious and/or invasive weeds from the treatment areas.  Indirect Effects  The short-term loss of vegetation could result in a loss of AUMs. The timeframe for this project is approximately 10 years, which would be treating about 4,200 acres per year.  Resting treated areas from livestock grazing could lead to a loss of grazing opportunities for livestock permittees, through reducing the season of use or authorized numbers of livestock. If grazing opportunities are lost, permittees will have to find other feed (AUMs) for their livestock during the rest period. Generally finding feed to replace lost AUMs on the forest is more expensive because the current grazing fee charged by the forest is only $1.35 per AUM. If permittees have to feed hay, the cost could be about $90 per AUM (see equation above). Impacts to the permittees would be minimized with herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. Continued livestock grazing in the non-treatment areas is subject to the Fishlake National Forest forage utilization standards and guidelines. Annual monitoring and enforcement of these standards and guidelines would continue.  Cumulative Effects  A list the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions that are relevant to range management on Monroe Mountain is included in appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015). Most of the projects identified in this appendix are vegetation management and livestock grazing improvement projects. Vegetation management projects usually end up being beneficial for the rangeland resources. The livestock management projects distribute grazing over a larger area to reduce the impact to any particular location. Most of the acres treated on Monroe Mountain have been with fire (prescribed fire and wildfire). Prescribed fire is the treatment that will be used to treat most of the acres included in all the alternatives.  The past treatments in the aspen communities have been relatively small and the aspen regeneration (sprouts) have suffered from the effects of grazing, as animals keyed in on those small treatments which produced more and better forage. Appendix A of the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project Rangeland Resource Specialist Report (Partridge 2015) also shows that approximately 49,000 (28 percent of National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain) acres of vegetation (mixed vegetation types) have been or will be treated from 1969 through 2015 (46 years) a little over 1,000 acres per year. Alternative 5 would treat almost that many acres (42,000) in the aspen ecosystem in a 10-year period 4,200 acres per year.  Alternative 5 is a large-scale vegetation project designed to restore the aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain. Approximately 58 percent of the historical aspen ecosystem on Monroe Mountain will be treated by this alternative:  41,525 .................... ............ .................... ............ .................................... 71,000 .................... ........ ..................................... .................... ................. ........ ≈ 0.58 (........ 58 ............................ )  The thought behind this large-scale treatment is that to restore the aspen communities large landscape scale projects are needed so grazing animals will not overuse any one area and wipe out the aspen regeneration. This should be beneficial to the rangeland resources and provide more forage for grazing animals that are using the Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem.  This 41,525 acres represents 24 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain:  41,525 .................... ............ ........ .... ........ ............ .................................... 175,705 .................... ........ ........................ ................................ ≈ 0.24 (........ 24 ............................ )  When added with the past, present and reasonably foreseeable actions the cumulative effect that Alternative 5 would have on the environment is that approximately 52 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain would have better forage conditions. 3.5.3.5 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Since aspen reproduces by suckering, losing the aspen ecosystem entirely after treatment would be irreversible and irretrievable. Alternatives 2 through 5 are all large-scale aspen ecosystem treatments designed to restore aspen ecosystems. Adequate regeneration and protection of the regeneration from the effects of overgrazing (from livestock and wildlife) are keys to the success of this project. Section 0 and appendix C outline treatment monitoring and response options that could be taken to control the effects of overbrowsing on aspen regeneration. 3.5.3.6 Conclusions With many demands for forage in the West, including elk, deer, and permitted livestock grazing the decision to take no action and face losing such prolific producers of forage, as aspen are capable of should not be acceptable. A decision to make no changes in management (including no treatments) is still a decision and it carries its own risks and consequences as succession continues to move the vegetation toward late seral vegetation communities. The risks and consequences include (1) continued degradation of the aspen ecosystem, (2) continued loss of forage, and (3) increased risks of large wildfires with associated concerns.  Alternatives 2 through 5 are all large-scale aspen ecosystem treatments designed to restore aspen ecosystems. All of these alternatives would treat approximately 23 to 27 percent of the National Forest System acres on Monroe Mountain. Adequate regeneration and protection of the regeneration from the effects of overgrazing (livestock and wildlife) are keys to the success of this project, to restore aspen ecosystems. Browse thresholds and response options are proposed to help minimize impacts from overbrowsing of aspen by ungulates. The rangeland resources should benefit from any of the treatments. The difference between the alternatives regarding disturbance associated with the miles of temporary roads is small and should not affect the results of the project.  There were two issues effecting rangeland resources identified during project scoping. All the action alternatives (alternatives 2 through 5) include design features to address the issues.  Issue 5: Browsing by domestic and wild ungulates on new aspen shoots post-treatment and/or the continued high levels of aspen browsing in the stable aspen areas may result in complete loss of aspen stands. The design features built into the action alternatives of this proposed project that are designed to address Issue 5 are included below. First, livestock will not be allowed to graze treated areas for at least two growing seasons after treatment. Second, the District is proposing quantifiable aspen browse thresholds and response options that would be implemented if thresholds are exceeded (section 2.9 and appendix C). These browse thresholds and response options are applicable to alternatives 2 through 5. Based on implementation of the browse thresholds and response options, an adequate number of new aspen sprouts following treatments are expected to reach 6 feet in height and stable aspen stands are expected to begin showing improvement; thus moving towards accomplishing the desired conditions outlined for this project.  Issue 6: Project activities may result in livestock permittees not having a place to graze their livestock while vegetation is reestablishing on Monroe Mountain (two to three growing seasons). The acres that are proposed for treatment in alternatives 2 through 5 of this project are spread across ten different grazing allotments. Impacts to permittees would be minimized by the use of herding and temporary electric fences so that treatment areas and/or stable aspen stands can be rested while non-treatment areas can continue to be grazed. The permittees will also be notified at least 1 year in advance of treatments being done on their allotments so that they can plan accordingly. Based on this summary, the District anticipates that permittees will have a place to graze their livestock while treatment areas or stable aspen stands are being rested. Based on this summary, the District anticipates that permittees would have a place to graze their livestock while treatment areas or stable aspen stands are being rested.  There are two monitoring options being considered to complement the established and already on going monitoring of aspen stands on Monroe Mountain. These monitoring options are expected to give better understanding of wildlife use of aspen in the absence of livestock grazing. Monitoring option 2 would be the best option for range management because this option would rest 3,637 fewer acres than monitoring option 1. Monitoring option 2 would also spread the rested acres for monitoring across five allotments instead of one allotment. Compared to resting the Dairies pasture (monitoring option 1), the exclosures would be less disruptive to the rotation grazing system in place on the mountain, and would also likely generate more representative data, given their locations in diverse aspen communities and they will be subject to varying wild ungulate usage.  The difference in the effects of alternatives 2 through 5 on the rangeland resources of Monroe Mountain are minor and are a function of the acres which will be treated under each alternative. Alternative 4 would be the best alternative for range management on Monroe Mountain because more acres, 27 percent of National Forest System lands on Monroe Mountain, would be treated. This alternative has the potential to produce the biggest increase in forage resources for grazing animals.  After this analysis was completed, an additional Northern goshawk nest with its associated territory was found near Indian Peak. Approximately 310 acres of the territory overlap this aspen project. These 310 acres occur mostly in stable aspen and make up less than 1 percent of the project area. If these 310 acres were not treated, there would be little impact to rangeland resources on Monroe Mountain. 3.6 Issue 7 – Project activities may result in adverse impacts to old growth characteristics This discussion is extrapolated directly from the Vegetation and Climate Change Specialist Report (Holsclaw 2015; appendix N in this EIS ).  Methodology 3.6.1 for Analysis The primary source of information for the analysis in this report is derived from common stand exam (CSE) data. Data was collected during the 2013 field season. The project area was divided into thirds providing a northern, central, and southern section. Stands were chosen by cover type within each zone ensuring that we had a sample that covered the entire project area. The goal was to collect data on 10 percent of the stands and 10 percent of the acres by cover type across the project area. The cover types targeted were: 1) aspen (stable and seral), 2) spruce/fir, and 3) mixed conifer. Data was collected using random plot sampling and a common stand exam recommendation of 1 plot per 10 acres with a minimum of 3 plots for those stands less than 30 acres (Natural Resource Information System (NRIS) 2013). It is the professional opinion of the District forester that this sampling is representative of the above cover types and is sufficient for analyzing the entire project area.  Data derived from CSE was used in the Forest Vegetation Simulator (FVS) model. This is a growth and yield model able to calculate the growth and yield of stands through time. The FVS model is also capable of modeling different management alternatives and silvicultural systems and project them through time.  Many years of research have gone into the development of the FVS model and it is very good at calculating growth and yield. The model uses the common stand exam data to project growth and yield; however, (with the exception of species that sucker (mainly aspen and oaks)) it cannot predict the amount or input regeneration through time. Because the model behaves in this way, trees that are removed due to harvest, fire, and/or density mortality, etc., are not replaced. When projected through time, it will eventually run out of trees and outputs can then become erroneous and unreliable. With that said, assumptions were made concerning regeneration. The assumptions are based on experience related to regeneration density and survival rates, the Fishlake LRMP, and input from the interdisciplinary team. The assumptions are based on cover types to maintain consistency with this report and the LRMP.  Aspen Cover Type- minimum average of 5,000 suckers (aspen trees less than 6 feet in height) per acre. This number is outlined as the desired condition for this project. The LRMP outlines a minimum value of 300 seedlings per acre with a desired of 600 seedlings per acre (pg. IV-32).  Spruce/fir Cover Type- Natural regeneration (stocking) of 155 seedlings per acre (pg. IV-32 of LRMP).  Mixed Conifer- Natural regeneration (stocking) of 215 seedlings per acre (pg. IV-32 of LRMP).  Photos taken during CSE data collection were also used in this analysis to illustrate stands as examples of composition, structure, etc. These photos are included in the project record.  Geographic Information System (GIS) information was also used as part of the analysis. This use would be in the form of maps. These maps are included in the project record.  3.6.2 Affected Environment Old growth is analyzed by cover type as written by Hamilton (1993) in Characteristics of Old Growth in the Intermountain Region. In addition, the Intermountain Regional Office issued a memo in 2007 to further clarify the measures needed to establish what the minimum old growth standard is. In this memo, it is stated, “The minimum criteria to define old-growth forest in the Intermountain Region are: Diameter at Breast Height (DBH), trees per acre (TPA), and age (AGE).” Old growth is getting its own heading because the LRMP states in the General Direction section on page IV-II, 1(c), “in a forested unit 5 percent or more should be in old growth”. A forested unit is being defined as the entire forested area within the project boundary. This includes all the cover types. Table 125 outlines what the current conditions are as it relates to old growth.  Points of clarification: In each cover type, Hamilton (1983) offers an area of application. He describes where these attributes need to be applied. Under the aspen cover type, Hamilton explains that the old growth aspen definition applies to the stable and grazing disclimax stands. The seral stands may contain what may qualify as old growth, but its maintenance would require a treatment to remove the competing conifers. In Table 125 seral aspen stands are included within the calculations because the proposed action, in part, is removing conifers as a “maintenance action and to promote aspen regeneration”. Therefore, it is the professional opinion of the District forester that the analysis meets the requirements as outlined by Hamilton.  Hamilton does not have a cover type listed as mixed conifer; therefore, the District forester chose to use the Douglas fir cover type. It was chosen because Hamilton’s description of dry or colder, lower productivity sites fit with the composition of most of the mixed conifer stands in the project area. Hamilton’s best description is, “Douglas fir often the seral dominant as well as the climax dominant. Engelmann spruce or subalpine fir also are climax habitat types series”. Some of the surveyed stands contained white fir. Although Hamilton does not address those in his description, they are a common associate at lower, drier elevations.  Table 125. Current percentage of forested acres of old growth in areas proposed for treatments Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 13,314 37% Mixed Conifer 4,280 0 0% Spruce/fir 8,065 807 10% Forested Acres 48,330 14,121 29%  Most of the old growth currently exists within the aspen cover type followed by spruce/fir. Mixed conifer contains elements of old growth but did not fully meet the definition (mainly because it did not have enough trees per acre greater than or equal to 15 inches DBH) and none of the mixed conifer stands had trees old enough to meet the greater than or equal to 200 years old.  There has been an outbreak of spruce beetles on Monroe Mountain. Little if any was picked up in the common stand exam in the form of measured dead trees. The outbreak consisted mainly in the Indian Peaks area as of 2013. The outbreak has moved south and it has reached the Manning Meadows Reservoir and Barney Lake areas. Site visitations in 2014 revealed massive loss of overstory and likely mature trees. This epidemic will likely decrease the old growth within the spruce/fir cover type. In addition to the spruce beetle, a spruce budworm outbreak is occurring. Spruce budworm is a defoliator insect attacking the new needles. There preferred species is Douglas fir and subalpine fir. They will go after spruce, but that is not the preferred. The spruce budworm does not usually kill the larger trees (although they can kill the smaller ones) but stresses them making them more susceptible to other things such as the Douglas fir beetle. Halloin (2003) confirms the last statement in his research stating, “Smaller trees tend to suffer more from the effects of defoliation, and larger trees tend to suffer more mortality from subsequent bark beetle attack.”  Environmental 3.6.3 Consequences 3.6.3.1 Alternative 1 – No action Direct Effects Old growth is described in chapter 1 as it relates to the current condition on Monroe Mountain. Old growth currently meets the desired condition as outlined in the LRMP (Table 126). The percentage of old growth increases with this alternative as time progress. As with the VSS, the old growth for the aspen cover type is somewhat misleading in some stands in year 50 and 100 because it is likely that some of those stands would convert to mixed conifer and/or spruce/fir or die because of old age. Some mixed conifer qualifies as old growth 100 years from now.  In addition, current spruce beetle outbreak is likely to affect the larger trees in the spruce/fir and mixed conifer cover types because larger, older trees are preferred by the beetle. Larger, older Douglas fir trees are susceptible to Douglas fir beetle and maybe affected if an outbreak of Douglas fir beetle were to occur.  Table 126. Old growth for alternative 1 - no action Current Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 13,314 37% Mixed Conifer 4,280 0 0% Spruce/fir 8,065 807 10% Forested Acres 48,330 14,121 29% Desired Forested Acres   5% Year 50- No Action Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 24,830 69% Mixed Conifer 4,280 0 0% Spruce/fir 8,065 2,984 37% Forested Acres 48,330 27,814 58% Desired Forested Acres   5% Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 2 8,186 92 19,795 5,479 48,330 14,121 5,571 8,550 18% Old Growth Year 100- No Action Cover Type Acres Acres in Old Growth Percentage of Old Growth Aspen 35,985 32,746 91% Mixed Conifer 4,280 1,712 40% Spruce/fir 8,065 3,629 45% Forested Acres 48,330 38,088 79% Desired Forested Acres   5% 3.6.3.2 Alternative 2 Direct Effects  Table 127 compares forested old growth between alternative 2, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1.  Table 127. Old growth comparison between alternatives 1 and 2   Alternative 2 shows an 11 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 2, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved.  Cumulative Effects  Old growth would decline by 11 percent via past and present actions and decline 1 percent through foreseeable future actions, totaling 12 percent for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 128). The LRMP related old growth standards would be achieved.      Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 3 13,648 236 18,814 5,223 48,330 14,121 5,459 8,662 18% Old Growth Table 128. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 2 Cumulative Effects- Old Growth  Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 2 Acres of Old Growth Affected Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48,330 14,121 0 0 0 0 29% Alt 2 48,330 14,121 5,571 135 5,706 18% 17% 3.6.3.3 Alternative 3 Direct Effects  Table 129 compares forested old growth between alternative 3, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1.  Table 129. Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 3   Alternative 3 shows an 11 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 3, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved.   Cumulative Effects  Old growth will decline by 11 percent via past and present actions and decline 1 percent through foreseeable future actions, totaling 12 percent for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 130). The LRMP related old growth standards would be achieved.   Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 4 19,837 411 16,462 4,547 48,330 14,121 4,958 9,163 19% Old Growth Table 130. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 3 Cumulative Effects- Old Growth  Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 3 Acres of Old Growth Affected Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48,330 14,121 0 0 0 0 29% Alt 3 48,330 14,121 5,459 228 5,687 18% 17% 3.6.3.4 Alternative 4 Direct Effects  Table 131 compares forested old growth between alternative 4, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1.  Table 131. Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 4   Alternative 4 shows a 10 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 4, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved.  Cumulative Effects  Old growth will decline by 10 percent via past and present actions and decline 1 percent through foreseeable future actions, totaling 11 percent for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 132). The LRMP related old growth standards would be achieved.   Mech Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 1 0 0 0 0 48330 14121 0 0 29% Alt 5 15,072 291 15,872 4,325 48,330 14,121 4,616 9,505 20% Old Growth Table 132. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 4 Cumulative Effects- Old Growth  Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 4 Acres of Old Growth Affected Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48330 14121 0 0 0 0 29% Alt 4 48,330 14,121 4,958 228 5,186 19% 18% 3.6.3.5 Alternative 5 Direct Effects  Table 133 compares forested old growth between alternative 5, options 1 and 2, with alternative 1.  Table 133. Old growth comparison between alternative 1 and alternative 5   Alternative 5 shows a 9 percent decline in forested old growth for option 1 and 2 versus alternative 1. Implementation of alternative 5, options 1 and 2 result in LRMP related old growth standards being achieved.  Cumulative Effects  Old growth will decline by 9 percent via past and present actions and decline 1 percent through foreseeable future actions, totaling 10 percent for past present and foreseeable future actions (Table 134).   Table 134. Cumulative effects on old growth for alternative 5 Cumulative Effects- Old Growth  Present Forested Acres Present Acres in Old Growth Alt. 5 Acres of Old Growth Affected Foreseeable Future Actions Affecting Old Growth Total Acres Affecting Old Growth (Past, Present and Foreseeable Future) Percent of Old Growth remaining after Alt. 2 Percentage of Old Growth remaining after all past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions are completed Alt 1 48330 14121 0 0 0 0 29% Alt 5 48,330 14,121 4,616 228 4,844 20% 19% 3.6.4 Conclusions All of the alternatives and options meet the requirement in the LRMP of 5 percent or more in old growth. Alternative 1 (no action) is currently at 29 percent old growth for the project as a whole. Overall, option 1 and 2 treatments show a 9 to 11 percent decrease in forested old growth compared to alternative 1. Additionally, old growth declines by an additional 1 percent for each alternative when factoring the cumulative effects. All alternatives and options (considering past, present and future) meet the LRMP and the changes (plus or minus) are minimal, in terms of percent, amongst one another (Table 135).   Table 135. All alternatives old growth comparison Old Growth  Mech. Treatment (total Acres) Mechanical Acres in Old Growth Option 1 and 2 60% of Acres Burned Acres in Old Growth- 60% of Acres Burned Current Forested Acres Current Acres in Old Growth Total Acres of Old Growth Affected by Treatments Difference Percentage of Old Growth Remaining After Treatment Alt 2 8,186 92 19,795 5,479 48,330 14,121 5,571 8,550 18% Alt 3 13,648 236 18,814 5,223 48,330 14,121 5,459 8,662 18% Alt 4 19,837 411 16,462 4,547 48,330 14,121 4,958 9,163 19% Alt 5 15,072 291 15,872 4,325 48,330 14,121 4,616 9,505 20% 3.7 All Other Resources The analyses of the resources related to the issues are outlined above. These resources were extrapolated from the specialists’ resource reports. The rest of the analysis for these resources can be found directly in the resource reports. These reports have been incorporated into this document by reference and are also attached as appendices. They are as follows:  • Air Quality (appendix E; Chappell 2015) • Aquatic Species (appendix F; Whelan 2015) • Botany (appendix H; Tait 2014) • Climate Change (appendix N; Holsclaw 2015) • Cultural/Heritage (appendix G; Leonard 2014) • Fire Ecology/Fire/Fuels (appendix I; Chappell et al. 2015) • Hydrology and Soils (appendix J; Solt 2015) • Inventoried Roadless Areas and Draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Areas (appendix K; Christensen 2015a) • Recreation (appendix M; Christensen 2015b) • Wildlife (appendix P; Rasmussen 2015) • Visuals (appendix O; Christensen 2015c) • Vegetation (appendix N; Holsclaw 2015) • Wildlife Biological Assessment and Evaluation (appendix Q) • Aquatics Biological Assessment and Evaluation (appendix R)  Please refer to these reports for the potential direct, indirect, and cumulative effects that this project may have on these resources. All specialists’ reports can be found on the Fishlake National Forest’s website at www.fs.usda.gov/projects/fishlake/landmanagement/projects. Paper copies of all reports are available upon request at the Fishlake National Forest Supervisor’s Office located in Richfield, Utah. 3.8 Short-term Uses and Long Term Productivity NEPA requires consideration of “the relationship between short-term uses of man’s environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity” (40 CFR 1502.16). As declared by the Congress, this includes using all practicable means and measures, including financial and technical assistance, in a manner calculated to foster and promote the general welfare, to create and maintain conditions under which man and nature can exist in productive harmony, and fulfill the social, economic, and other requirements of present and future generations of Americans (NEPA Section 101).  Overall, aspen restoration along with other proposed treatments including mechanical and prescribed fire would be expected to increase ecosystem resiliency to uncharacteristic fire, and move soils and watersheds toward satisfactory and functional condition in both the short- and long-term and maintain or improve long-term soil productivity and water quality (see the Hydrology and Soils Specialist Report (appendix J; Solt 2015)).  Short-term effects of tree removal and prescribed fire would reduce inter tree competition and free-up growing space for residual trees and understory vegetation. Under all alternatives, the proposed actions and associated design features would not affect long-term productivity of forest vegetation and timber resources (see the Vegetation Specialist Report (appendix N; Holsclaw 2015)). 3.9 Unavoidable Adverse Effects There would not be any unavoidable adverse effects to hydrology and soil resources. Potential adverse effects would be minimized or mitigated through appropriate use of resource protection measures outlined and project design criteria.  There would not be any unavoidable adverse effects related to forest vegetation and timber resources as adverse effects are mitigated by design features and mitigation.  For Northern goshawk, there is likely to be a short-term decrease in habitat quantity and quality; however, these values would increase in the long-term.  In the short-term (1 to 5 years), visual disturbances from restoration activities would be within the referenced conditions of the area. Disturbances would be visible and would lower the scenic quality. Potential short-term effects include exposure of bare soil, tree stumps, and contrasting color and texture of surfacing materials. The effects would become less noticeable as natural vegetation is reestablished and the surface material begins to be incorporated into the soil horizon.  The alternatives would cause short-term and temporary decreases in provision of recreation opportunities on parts of the District. There may be short-term displacement of recreationists during implementation and a temporary decrease in the quality of recreation settings due to the presence of slash, skid trails, log landings, temporary road construction, and creation of dust and noise from logging operations and log hauling. Logging operations including loss of herbaceous cover, disorderly management activities, and noise and dust, as well as lack of information, have been found to decrease the quality of recreation settings and user satisfaction. 3.10 Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources Irreversible commitments of resources are those that cannot be regained, such as the extinction of a species or the removal of mined ore. Irretrievable commitments are those that are lost for a period such as the temporary loss of timber productivity in forested areas that are kept clear for use as a power line rights-of-way or road.  An irretrievable commitment of resources is associated with alternative 1, the no action alternative. In alternative 1, there is the likelihood that there would be additional larger fires with larger areas with higher severity fires than occurred historically. Post-fire effects that require decades of recovery would be irretrievable in the short-term and potentially the longgerm. For example, topsoil that is critical to healthy surface vegetation would take centuries to recover. The loss of old growth and old trees would be irretrievable, as it would require decades and centuries to recover. When considered with climate change, it is unknown exactly what the ecological trajectory would be for the replacement of old growth and old trees (see Fire and Fuels Specialist Report (appendix I; Chappell et al. 2015). 3.11 Cumulative Effects Cumulative effects are addressed in the environmental consequences ‘topics’ discussions listed above or in each of the referenced specialists’ reports (see section 3.7). Please refer to the specific discussion or resource report for a detailed discussion of cumulative effects for this project. 3.12 Other Required Disclosures NEPA at 40 CFR 1502.25(a) directs “to the fullest extent possible, agencies shall prepare draft environmental impact statements concurrently with and integrated with …other environmental review laws and executive orders.”  • On October 1, 2012, the Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah, the Ute Indian Tribe, and the Hopi Indian Tribe were each sent the NOI to prepare a DEIS for this project. The District did not receive any comments from these tribes regarding this project. • On January 8, 2015, these same tribes were sent copies of the draft environmental impact statement. During the comment period for the DEIS, the Forest received comments from the Director of the Hopi Cultural Preservation Office. They stated that if the cultural resource survey of the area of potential effect identifies prehistoric sites that may be adversely affected by project activities, then copies of the cultural resources survey report and any proposed treatment plans be available for their review and comment. They also stated they support the project design feature that if any cultural features or deposits are encountered during project activities, these activities will be discontinued in the immediate area of the remains, and the State Historic Preservation Office would be consulted to evaluate their nature and significance. If any Native American human remains or funerary objects are discovered during construction, they shall immediately be reported as required by law. • The Utah State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) was contacted regarding this project and the consultation package for this FEIS was prepared and sent in. Section 106 concurrence and clearance for the project is complete. • The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) were contacted during the Notice-of-Intent phase of project development. They stated that they had no comments for the project at that time. No affects to threatened, endangered, candidate, or proposed species would occur with project implementation, therefore, consultation with the USFWS is not required. Copies of the draft environmental impact statement were sent to the USFWS for their comment, and their comments were taken into consideration for this final document. • No section 404 permits would be required from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as no stream channel alterations would occur because of this project.  4 CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION 4.1 Preparers and Contributors The Forest Service consulted the following individuals, Federal, state, and local agencies, tribes, and non-Forest Service persons during the development of this draft environmental impact statement.  The following personnel (Table 136) were directly involved with preparation of this draft environmental impact statement.  Table 136. DEIS preparers and contributors Name Title DEIS Contribution Chappell, Linda Fire Ecologist Fire/Fuels; Air Quality Child, Daniel Civil Engineer Transportation Christensen, David Recreation Specialist IRA/draft UUA; Recreation; Visuals Cornwall, Kelly Fuels Specialist Fire/Fuels Freeborn, Wess Fuels Specialist Fire/Fuels Hollingsworth, LaWen Fire Behavior Specialist Fire/Fuels Holsclaw, Terry Forester Vegetation; Climate Change Jensen, Dustin GIS Specialist GIS; Data Analysis Kitchen, Stanley G. Research Biologist Fire/Fuels; Browse Thresholds Kling, Jason Richfield District Ranger NEPA; Writer/Editor Knight, Jenneka GIS Specialist GIS; Data Analysis Leonard, Robert Archaeologist Cultural/Heritage Pace, Vince Range Management Specialist Range Partridge, Art Range Management Specialist Range Rasmussen, Kreig Wildlife Biologist Wildlife Rodriguez, Ron Wildlife and Fish Program Manager Wildlife Solt, Adam Forest Hydrologist Hydrology/Soils Tait, David Botanist Botany Tobler, Scott Fire Planner Fire/Fuels Torres, Amy Wildlife Biologist (ACT2 Enterprise Unit) ID Team Lead; Writer/Editor Whelan, James Fisheries Biologist Aquatics Zapell, John Public Affairs Specialist  4.2 Federal, State, and Local Agencies and Representatives Federal U.S. Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station  State Utah Division of Wildlife Resources Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands Utah Division of Agriculture and Food  Local Piute County Commission Sevier County Commission  Working Groups  Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group-Ecology Committee • Christensen, Bill • Dremann, Paul • Hopkin, Bill • MacWhorter, Rob • Mueller, Kevin • O’Brien, Mary • Rogers, Paul • Rowley, Allen  Monroe Mountain Working Group • Brigham Young University • Grand Canyon Trust • Piute County Commission • Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation • Sevier County Commission • Sportsmen for Fish and Wildlife • Trout Unlimited • Utah Cattlemen’s Association • Utah Division of Agriculture and Food • Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands • Utah Division of Wildlife Resources • Utah Farm Bureau • Utah State University Extension • Utah Woolgrowers Association • Western Aspen Alliance  Universities Brigham Young University Utah State University Extension 4.3 List of Acronyms AIS Aquatic Invasive Species ATV All-Terrain Vehicle AUM Animal Unit Month BA Basal Area BCI Biotic Condition Index BMPs Best Management Practices BVCT Bonneville Cutthroat Trout CEA Cumulative Effects Area CFR Code of Federal Regulations cfs Cubic Feet per Second CSE Common Stand Exam DBH Diameter at Breast Height DEIS Draft Environmental Impact Statement District Richfield Ranger District EPA Environmental Protection Agency ERA Equivalent Roaded Area Forest Fishlake National Forest FSM Forest Service Manual FVS Forest Vegetation Simulator GIS Geographic Information Systems GHG Greenhouse Gas HFRA Healthy Forest Restoration Act HUC Hydrologic Unit Code IRA Inventoried Roadless Area IRE Integrated Riparian Evaluation LRMP Fishlake National Forest's Land and Resource Management Plan MA Management Area MIS Management Indicator Species MMWG Monroe Mountain Working Group NA Nest Area NEPA National Environmental Policy Act NFMA National Forest Management Act NMFS National Marine Fisheries Service NOI Notice of Intent PARC Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation PFA Post-Fledgling Area PFC Properly Functioning Condition PM Particulate Matter PSD Prevention of Significant Deterioration R4 Region 4 RAC Resource Advisory Committee RACR Roadless Area Conservation Rule RHCA Riparian Habitat Conservation Area SOPA Schedule of Proposed Actions CTQ Community tolerance Quotient TOC Threshold of Concern UCP Utah Conservation Partnership UDWR Utah Division of Wildlife Resources UFRWG Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group USDA United States Department of Agriculture USFS United States Forest Service USFWS United States Fish and Wildlife Service UUA Unroaded-Undeveloped Area VSS Vegetative Structural Stage WEPP Water Erosion Prediction Project   Index air quality .......................................... 47, 407 Alternative 1 No Action ..... iv, vi, 32, 65, 208, 224, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 238, 239, 243, 244, 299, 302, 314, 320, 331, 333, 346, 348, 349, 358, 363, 373, 375, 376, 377, 385, 390, 397 Alternative 2..... v, vii, 41, 42, 43, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 76, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115, 153, 154, 155, 159, 161, 164, 166, 167, 169, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179, 180, 181, 185, 187, 189, 191, 193, 195, 197, 199, 201, 203, 205, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 238, 239, 244, 246, 247, 248, 373, 377, 378, 379, 391 Alternative 3... 41, 42, 43, 76, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 86, 87, 109, 110, 112, 113, 114, 115, 153, 155, 156, 159, 161, 164, 166, 167, 169, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179, 181, 182, 185, 187, 189, 191, 193, 195, 197, 199, 201, 203, 205, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 238, 239, 244, 246, 247, 248, 373, 379, 381, 392 Alternative 4... vii, 41, 42, 43, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 97, 109, 110, 112, 113, 114, 115, 153, 156, 157, 159, 161, 164, 166, 167, 169, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179, 182, 183, 185, 187, 189, 191, 193, 195, 197, 199, 201, 203, 205, 229, 231, 232, 233, 236, 238, 239, 244, 246, 247, 248, 331, 373, 381, 383, 393 Alternative 5..... vii, 42, 43, 97, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 107, 108, 109, 111, 112, 114, 115, 153, 158, 159, 161, 164, 166, 167, 169, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179, 184, 185, 187, 189, 191, 193, 195, 197, 199, 201, 203, 205, 229, 230, 231, 232, 234, 238, 239, 244, 246, 247,248, 316, 373, 383, 384, 385, 394 Alternatives Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Further Analysis and Record of the Evolution of the Proposed Action and Alternatives ............................... 115 Alternatives Considered in Detail ......... 65 Comparison of Alternatives ................ 108 Appendices Appendix A .... 1, 354, 376, 379, 381, 383, 385 Appendix B ..................................... 1, 416 Appendix C ..................... 1, 286, 320, 418 Aspen .... iii, iv, vi, vii, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 49, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 76, 77, 78, 87, 88, 89, 97, 98, 99, 100, 108, 123, 124, 125, 142, 150, 152, 159, 164, 167, 171, 175, 178, 185, 189, 193, 197, 201, 205, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 218, 219, 220, 225, 226, 227, 236, 239, 241, 242, 244, 250, 251, 295, 304, 320, 321, 326, 328, 352, 353, 355, 356, 357, 358, 360, 361, 363, 365, 367, 368, 369, 371, 372, 373, 374, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389, 390, 396, 405, 406, 407, 412, 413, 414, 415, 417, 420, 421 BA 90 ................................................ 49, 314 Browsing iv, 3, 14, 21, 25, 31, 34, 38, 54, 56, 58, 59, 60, 64, 65, 124, 215, 220, 284, 353, 355, 357, 374, 386 Climate Change ............................... 396, 399 Design Criteria ........... iv, 1, 32, 62, 241, 397 draft Unroaded/Undeveloped Areas .. 73, 83, 104 draft UUA 40, 66, 67, 77, 78, 87, 88, 98, 99, 108, 113, 114, 129, 131, 132, 134, 144, 148, 178, 186, 189, 190, 192, 194, 196, 198, 200, 202, 204, 206, 226, 399 fire behavior . v, 37, 208, 209, 210, 211, 215, 216, 218, 220, 225, 226, 227, 228, 240, 405, 417 goshawk v, 25, 27, 30, 37, 45, 46, 48, 54, 55, 57, 62, 66, 67, 79, 89, 99, 100, 109, 123, 240, 241, 242, 243, 245, 246, 249, 250, 360, 368, 397, 406, 409, 416, 417, 418, 421 Inventoried Roadless Areas ... 31, 51, 54, 73, 82, 93, 103, 107, 123, 126, 127, 129, 152, 205, 396 IRA iv, 40, 66, 67, 70, 76, 77, 78, 86, 87, 88, 91, 97, 98, 99, 107, 108, 111, 112, 114, 126, 129, 130, 131, 133, 136, 139, 141, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 161, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 177, 178, 205, 206, 226, 399, 401 Issue 1 ................. 37, 62, 67, 78, 88, 99, 126 Issue 2 37, 62, 67, 79, 89, 99, 206, 211, 229, 231, 232, 238 Issue 3 ............... 37, 62, 67, 79, 89, 100, 240 Issue 4 ............... 38, 62, 68, 80, 90, 100, 251 Issue 5 ................................. 38, 64, 355, 386 Issue 6 ................................. 38, 64, 355, 386 Issue 7 ......................................... 39, 65, 387 Land and Resource Management Plan .. iii, 9, 32, 33, 69, 79, 90, 101, 124, 206, 218, 252, 258, 401, 418 NA ..................................... 45, 109, 241, 401 nest areas ..................... 45, 89, 115, 240, 241 old growth . iv, vii, 12, 39, 65, 108, 225, 387, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394, 395, 397 PFA ......................... 109, 241, 243, 246, 401 post-fledgling areas ......................... 115, 241 Private Property iv, v, 21, 37, 55, 57, 62, 66, 67, 79, 89, 99, 108, 123, 125, 206, 211, 213, 225, 228, 229, 231, 240, 243 Project Background ..................................... 3 Project Location .......................................... 3 Range . 23, 27, 33, 69, 79, 90, 101, 110, 133, 134, 249, 250, 302, 303, 399, 405, 406, 412, 416, 420 RHCA ..................................................... 402 VSS ..... 7, 10, 12, 13, 45, 243, 250, 390, 402 Wild and Domestic Ungulates .................. 38 Wildlife ..................................................... 54   REFERENCES  Ager, A.A, N.M. Vaillant, and M.A. Finney. 2011. Integrating fire behavior models, and geospatial analysis for wildland fire risk assessment and fuel management planning. Hindawi Publishing Corporation. Journal of Combustion, Volume 2011, Article ID 572452. 19pp.  Albrecht, J. 2014. Letter from the Utah Wildlife Board supporting the concepts and objectives of the Browsing Thresholds and Adaptive Management Pursuant to Aspen Restoration on Monroe Mountain document (dated January 15, 2014). State of Utah, Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Utah Wildlife Board. August 28, 2014.  Alexander, M.E. 1982. Calculating and interpreting forest fire intensities. Canadian Journal of Botany: 349-357.  Alexander, R. 1987. Ecology, silviculture, and management of the Engelmann spruce - subalpine fir type in the central and southern Rocky Mountains. USDA Forest Service, Agriculture Handbook No. 659, 144 pp.  Amacher, M.C., A.D. Johnson, D. E. Kutterer, and D. L. Bartos. 2001. First-year post fire and postharvest soil temperatures in aspen and conifer stands. Res. Pap. RMRS- RP-27-WWW. Ogden, UT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 24 pp.  Andrews, P.L. and R.C. Rothermel. 1982. Charts for interpreting wildland fire behavior characteristics. General Technical Report INT-131. Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT 84401. 24 pp.  Andrews, P.L., F.A. Heinsch, and L. Schelvan. 2011. How to generate and interpret fire characteristics charts for surface and crown fire behavior. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRSGTR-253. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 40 p.  Bartos, D.L. 2007. Aspen. Chapter 3. USDA Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-202.  Bartos, D.L. and R.B. Campbell, Jr. 1998a. Decline of quaking aspen in the interior westexamples from Utah. Rangelands 20 (1) Pages 17-24.  Bartos, D.L. and R.B. Campbell, Jr. 1998b. Water depletion and other ecosystem values forfeited when conifer forests displace aspen communities. Rangeland Management and Water Resources, American Water Resources Association. pg. 427.  Belt, G.H., J.O. O'Laughlin, and T. Merrill. 1992. Design of forest riparian buffer strips for the protection of water quality: Analysis of scientific literature. Idaho Forest, Wildlife, Range Policy Group, Rept. 8, Univ. Idaho, Moscow, 35 pp.  Bigler, C., D. Kulakowski, and T.T. Veblen. 2005. Multiple disturbance interactions and drought influence severity in Rocky Mountain subalpine forests. Ecology, 86(11), 2005, pp. 3018–3029 the Ecological Society of America. Department of Geography, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80903 USA.  Boal, C. W. and Mannan, R. W. 1994. Northern goshawk diets in ponderosa pine forests on the Kaibab Plateau. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14-15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian Biology. Cooper Ornithological Society: 16: 97-102.  Bradley, A., Noste, N. and Fischer, W. 1992. Fire ecology of forests and woodlands in Utah. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical Report INT-287, 92 pp.  Bright-Smith, D. J. and Mannan, R. W. 1994. Habitat use by breeding male northern goshawks in Northern Arizona. Studies in Avian Biology 16: 58-65. Brown, James K. 1975.  Brown, J.K. and D.G. Simmerman. 1986. Appraising fuels and flammability in western aspen: a prescribed fire guide. General Technical Report INT-205. Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, UT 84401. 51 pp.  Browne, C.L. and C.A. Paszkowski. 2010. Hibernation Sites of Western Toads (Anaxyrus boreas): Characterization and Management Implications. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 5(1):49-63.  Bull, E. L. 2006. Sexual Differences in the Ecology and Habitat Selection of Western Toads (Bufo boreas) in Northeastern Oregon. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 1(1):27-38.  BVCT State of Utah Conservation Team. 2008. Conservation agreement for Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah) in the State of Utah. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah.  Campbell, Robert B. 1995. A primer for understanding the value, ecology, and biology of quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) ecosystems. Forest Ecologist (ret).  Campbell, R.B. and D.L. Bartos. 2001. Aspen ecosystems: objectives for sustaining biodiversity. In W. D. Shepperd, W.D. Binkley, D.L. Bartos, T.J. Stohlgren, and L.G. Eskew (comps.) sustaining aspen in western landscapes: symposium proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, Colorado. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. p. 299-307.  Campbell, R.B., D.L. Bartos, L.M. Chappell, and K. Greenhalgh. 2004 Aspen firebreaks: 60 years of treatments in south central Utah. Poster. Presented at: Managing Aspen Conference 2004. Utah State University.  Cannon, S. H, J. E. Gartner, M, G. Rupert, J. A. Michael, A. H. Rea, and C. Parrett. 2010. Predicting the probability and volume of postwildfire debris flows in the Intermountain Western United States. GSA Bulletin 122(1/2):127-144.  Cannon, S. H. and J. DeGraff. 2009. The increasing wildfire and post-fire debris-flow threat in western USA, and implications for consequences of climate change. Pages 177-190 in Sassa, K. and P. Canuti (eds.). Landslides—Disaster Risk Reduction. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg. 668 pp.  Cannon, S., Gartner, J., Holland-Sears, A., Thurston, B., Gleason, J. 2003. Debris-flow response of basins burned by the 2002 Coal Seam and Missionary Ridge Fires, Colorado. In Boyer, D.D., Santi, P.M., and Rogers, W.P., eds., Engineering Geology in Colorado- Contributions, Trends, and Case Histories: AEG Special Publication 14, on CD-ROM.  Chappell, L.M., R.B. Campbell, and K.P. Greenhalgh. 1997. A fire history study conducted on the Monroe Mountain demonstration area. Richfield District, Fishlake National Forest and Bureau of Land Management. 24 pp.  Chappell, L.M. 2015. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project air quality specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 7, 2015.  Chappell, L.M., W. Freeborn, S. Tobler, and S.G. Kitchen. 2015. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project fire ecology/fire/fuels specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 3, 2015.  Christensen, D. 2015a. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem restoration Inventoried Roadless Area and draft Unroaded-Undeveloped Area specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 3, 2015.  Christensen, D. 2015b. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem restoration project recreation specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 7, 2015.  Christensen, D. 2015c. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystem restoration project visuals specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 6, 2015.  Clark, D.J. 1997. Survey results for Arizona willow (Salix arizonica). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Utah. September 1997.  Clark, D.J. 1999. 1999 Survey results for Arizona willow (Salix arizonica). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. September 26, 1999.  Clark, D. J. 2001. 2001 Survey results for Arizona willow (Salix arizonica). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. September 28, 2001.  Clark, D.J. 2002. 2001 Survey results for Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) (includes summary of findings from 2001). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. September 30, 2002.  Clark, D. J. 2004. 2004 Rare plant survey results. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. September 27, 2004.  Clark, D. J. 2005. 2005 Survey Results for Arizona Willow (Salix arizonica). Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. September 23, 2005.  Costello, S.L., and B. Howell. 2006. biological evaluation of spruce beetle and mountain pine beetle activity in the Sierra Madre Analysis Area on the Parks Ranger District, Medicine Bow-Routt National Forests and Thunder Basin National Grassland. Biological Evaluation R2-06-09. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region, Renewable Resources, P.O. Box 25127, Lakewood, CO 80225.  Desert News. 1855. Harmony, from Elder S.F. Atwood to Elder E. T. Benson. Harmony, August 1, 1855 (9/19/1855).  Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Department of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Fish and Wildlife Service, National Park Service. 2001. Urban Wildland Interface Communities Within the Vicinity of Federal Lands That Are at High Risk From Wildfire. Federal Register / Vol. 66, No. 160 / Friday, August 17, 2001 / Notices  Dieterich, J.H. 1983. Fire history of southwestern mixed conifer: a case study. Fire Ecology and Management, 8 (1983) 13-31. Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam.  Deiter, D. 2002. Fishlake National Forest 2001 Watershed Monitoring Report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. 9pp.  Duffield, D. no date. Briefing paper for fine sediment effects on brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) in selected streams of the Monongahela National Forest. USDA Forest Service 9 pp. plus charts  Evans, A.M., R.G. Everett, S.L. Stephans, and J.A. Youtz. 2011. Comprehensive Fuels Treatment Practices Guide for Mixed Conifer Forests: California, Central and Southern Rockies, and the Southwest. Forest Guild, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.  Eyre, F.H. 1980. Forest cover types of the United States and Canada. Society of American Foresters. 5400 Grosvenor Lane, Washington, D.C. 20014. pg. 1.  Finney, M.A. Revised 2004. FARSITE: Fire Area Simulator—model development and evaluation. Res. Pap. RMRS-RP-4, Ogden, Utah: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 47 p.  Forest Ecosystem Management Assessment Team (FEMAT). 1993. Forest ecosystem management: an ecological, economic, and social assessment. U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of Commerce, and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. 729pp.  Franklin, J. and Forman R.T.T. 1987. Creating landscape patterns by forest cutting: ecological consequences and principles. Landscape Ecology. 1:5-18.  Franklin, J., T.A. Spies, R. Van Pelt, A.B. Carey, and D.A. Thornburgh, D.R. Berg, D.B. Lindenmayer, K. Bible, and J. Chen. 2002. Disturbances and structural development of natural forest ecosystems with silvicultural implications, using Douglas-fir forests as an example. Forest Ecology and Management 155: 399-423.  Freeman, E.D., R.T. Larsen, M.E. Peterson, C.R. Anderson Jr., K.R. Hershey, B.R. McMillian. 2014. Effects of Male-Biased Harvest on Mule Deer: Implications for Rates of Pregnancy, Synchrony, and Timing of Parturition. Wildlife Society Bulletin; DOI: 10.1002/wsb.450  Fridell, R.A., K.M. Comella, G.N. Garnett, B.A. Zettle, T.K. Smith, D.L. Harstad. 2000. Boreal Toad (Bufo boreas boreas) Distribution Surveys in Southwestern Utah 1994-1998. Publication number 00-10. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 21pp.  Goates, M.C. 2004. Boreal toad movement patterns and habitat use in south-central Utah. Powerpoint presented at 2004 Colorado Boreal Toad Conservation Team Meeting, Grand Junction, Colorado.  Goates, M.C. 2006. The dogma of the 30 meter riparian buffer: the case of the boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas). M.S. Thesis. Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. 48pp.  Goates, M.C., K.A. Hatch, and D.L. Eggett. 2007. The need to ground truth 30.5m buffers: A case study of the boreal toad (Bufo boreas). Biological Conservation 138: 474-483.  Graham, R.T., R.L. Rodriguez, K.M. Paulin, R.L. Player, A.P. Heap, and R. Williams. 1999. The northern goshawk in Utah: habitat assessment and management recommendations. Gen. Tech. Report RMRS-GTR-22. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Ogden, Utah. 48 pp.  Graham, R.T., T.B. Jain, and M. Loseke. 2009. Fuel treatments, fire suppression, and their interactions with wildfire and its effects: the warm lake experience during the Cascade Complex of wildfires in central Idaho, 2007. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-229.  Greenwood, L. 2014. Annual spring deer population data 2014. Annual Post-season Deer Population data 2013. Bureau of Land Management Deer Database, U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Richfield Field Office, 150 East 900 North Richfield, Utah 84701  Groebner, C.M., G.L. Lenhart, and C.L. Craig. 2004. 2004 Survey results for Arizona willow (Salix arizonica) September 13, 2004.  Guscio, C.G., B.R. Hossack, L.A. Eby, and P.S. Corn. 2008. Post-breeding habitat use by adult boreal toads (Bufo boreas) after wildfire in Glacier National Park, USA. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 3(1):55-62.  Hadley, M.J. 2008. Barney Lake 2008 Trend Netting. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J. 2012. Field survey report - trout population survey Fish Creek and East Fork Fish Creek. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M.J. 2013a. Manning Meadow Reservoir 2013 trend net survey. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah.  Hadley, M.J. 2013b. Barney Lake 2013 trend netting. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah.  Hadley, M.J. 2013c. Upper and Lower Box Creek Reservoirs 2013a Trend Netting. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J. 2014. Big Lake and Deep Lake 2014 Trend Net Survey. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J. and R.D. Hepworth. 2013b. Trapping and spawning of Bonneville cutthroat trout at Manning Meadow Reservoir, 2013. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, and J. E. Whelan. 2011a. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Middle Sevier River drainage, Utah, 2008-2010. Publication number 11-02. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 46pp.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, and M .E. Golden. 2011b. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Upper Virgin River drainage, Utah, 2009-2010. Publication number 11-03. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 35 pp.  Hadley, M. J., M. J. Ottenbacher, M .E. Golden, and J. E. Whelan. 2010. Survey of Bonneville cutthroat trout in the Upper Sevier River and East Fork Sevier River drainages, 2008-2009. Publication number 10-20. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 32 pp.  Halloin, L. 2003. Major defoliating insects of the intermountain west, western spruce budworm and douglas fir tussock moth. Washington Department of Natural Resources. May 21, 2003  Hamilton, R.C. April 1993. Characteristics of Old Growth Forests in the Intermountain Region. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah.  Hammons, K. 2008. Utah firewise living, Utah living with fire. Community Solutions. 33 pp.  Haraden, P. 2013. Twitchell fire salvage sale: hydrology report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. 24pp.  Hebertson, E. 2013. OFO-TR-10-13 Forest health protection (FHP) functional assistance visit to the Fremont Ranger District, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  Heinsch, F.A.; and P.L. Andrews. 2010. BehavePlus fire modeling system, version 5.0:Design and Features. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-249. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 111 p.  Helms, J.A. 1998. The dictionary of forestry. The Society of American foresters and CABI Pub. 210 p.  Hepworth, D. K. 2005. Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Southern Region Aquatics Program Manager (retired), Personal communication regarding average southern Utah stream fish biomass levels.  Hepworth, D.K., M.J. Ottenbacher, C.B. Chamberlain, and J. E. Whelan. 2003. Abundance of Bonneville cutthroat trout in southern Utah, 2001-2002, compared to previous surveys. Publication number 03-18. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 66 pp.  Hepworth, D.K., M.J. Ottenbacher, C.B. Chamberlain, and J.E. Whelan. 2004. Trapping, spawning, and trend surveys of Bonneville cutthroat trout at Manning Meadow Reservoir, 2004. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 6pp.  Heyerdahl, E.K., P.M. Brown, S.G. Kitchen, and M.H. Weber. 2011. Multicentury fire and forest histories at 19 sites in Utah and eastern Nevada. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR- 261WWW. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 192 p.  Hogrefe, T.C., C.L. Bailey, P.D. Thompson, and B. Nadolski. 2005. Boreal toad (Bufo boreas boreas) conservation plan in the State of Utah. Utah Publication Number 05-37. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah. 65 pp.  Holsclaw, T. 2015. Vegetation and climate change specialists report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. June 5, 2015.  Hood, S.M., M. Miller, editors. 2007. Fire ecology and management of the major ecosystems of southern Utah. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-202. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. Fort Collins, Colorado. 110 p.  Hossack, B.R. and S. Corn. 2007. Responses of pond-breeding amphibians to wildfire: shortterm patterns in occupancy and colonization. Ecological Applications 17(5):1403-1410.  Jackson, L.L., Campbell, R.B., Chappell, L.M., Greenhalgh, K.P., Shiverdecker, W.T., and Weaver, D.A. 1998. Fishlake National Forest prescribed natural fire plan: Fire management situation and fire management action plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. 146 pp.  Jackson, L. L., Campbell, R.B., Chappell, L.M., Greenhalgh, K.P., Shiverdecker, and W.T., Weaver, D.A. 2000. Data update: Fishlake National Forest prescribed natural fire plan: fire management situation and fire management action plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. 146 pp.  Jenkins, M.J., E.G. Hebertson, and A.S. Munson. 2014. Spruce beetle biology, ecology and management in the Rocky Mountains: an addendum to spruce beetle in the Rockies. Forests. 5(1):21-71.  Jones, B.E., D. Burton, and K.W. Tate. 2005. Effectiveness monitoring of aspen regeneration on managed rangelands – a monitoring method for determining if management objectives are being met in aspen communities. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Region. 19 p.  Kaufmann, M.R., R.T. Graham, D.A. Boyce Jr., W.H. Moir, L. Perry, R.T. Reynolds, R.L. Bassett, P. Mehlhop, C.B. Edminster, W.M. Block, and P.S. Corn. 1994. An ecological basis for ecosystem management. General Technical Report RM-246. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. 22 pp.  Kay, C.E. 1993. Aspen seedlings in recently burned areas of grand teton and yellowstone national parks. Northwest Science, v. 67, no. 2, p. 94-104  Kay, C.E. 2003. Long-term vegetation change on Utah’s Fishlake National Forest: A study in repeat photography. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah and Utah State University, Logan, Utah. August 2003. 18 p.  Kimbell, A.R. 2009. Climate change considerations in project level NEPA analysis. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington Office, Washington, DC. January 13, 2009.  Kitchen, S.G. 2010. Historic fire regimes of eastern Great Basin (USA) Mountains reconstructed from tree rings. Department of Plant and Wildlife Sciences, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. 166 pp.  Kitchen, S.G., 2014. Personal communication. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado.  Lamberson, R. H.; McKelvey, R.; Noon, B. R.; Voss, C. 1992. A dynamic analysis of northern spotted owl viability in a fragmented forest landscape. Cons. Biol. 6(4):505-512.  Leonard, R. 2014. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project cultural/heritage specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. December 8, 2014.  Lentsch, L., Y. Converse, and J. Perkins. 1997. Conservation agreement and strategy for Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki pleuriticus) in the State of Utah. Publication No. 97-19. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Lentsch, L.D., C.A. Toline, J. Kershner, J.M. Hudson, and J. Mizzi. 2000. Range-wide Conservation Agreement and Strategy for Bonneville cutthroat trout (Oncorhynchus clarki utah). Publication No. 00-19. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 90pp.  Lien, P. and K. Wheeler. 2010. WCFO Field Report - Boreal Toad breeding and inventory surveys, June 21-25, 2010. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, St. George. 9 pp.  Madsen, M. 2003. Endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive, and management indicator vascular plants Fishlake National Forest. Compiled by M. Madsen, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. 72 pp.  Margolis, E.Q., T. Swetnam, and C.D. Allen. 2007. A stand-replacing fire history in upper montane forests of the southern Rocky Mountains. Canadian Journal of Forestry, Res. Vol. 37. pg. 2228.  McCarthy, C., Carrier, W. D., and Laudenslayer, W. F., Jr. 1989. Coordinating timber management activities with raptor nesting habitat requirements. In: Pendleton, B. G., comp. Proceedings of western raptor management symposium. 229-235.  McGurk, B.J. and D.R. Fong, 1995. Equivalent roaded area as a measure of cumulative effect of logging. Environmental Management 19(4): 609-621.  Moghaddas, J.J. 2006. A fuel treatment reduces potential fire severity and increases suppression efficiency in a Sierran mixed conifer forest. USDA Forest Service Proceedings. RMRS-P- 41. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington D.C.  Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG). 2012. Four aspen browse transects. 19 August 2011 through October 15, 2012. Monitoring subgroup [Gary Bezaant, Kim Chapman, John Keeler, Vance Mumford, Mary O’Brien, Stanley Kitchen, Thomas Tippetts). Monroe Mountain Working Group.  Monroe Mountain Working Group (MMWG). 2014. Browsing thresholds and adaptive management pursuant to aspen restoration on Monroe Mountain. Monroe Mountain Working Group.  Moore, K. R.; Henny, C. J. 1983. Nest site characteristics of three coexisting Accipiter hawks in northeastern Oregon. Raptor Research. 17(3):65-76.  Morelli, T.L. September 2009. The status of quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides) in the Sierra Nevada. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. Albany, California. September 2009. http://www.fs.fed.us/psw/topics/climate_change/ecosystem/quaking_aspen.html  Mueggler, W.F. 1989. Age distribution and reproduction of Intermountain aspen stands. Western Journal of Applied Forestry 4:41-45.  National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC). 2013. Online: http://www.nifc.gov/safety/safety_documents/Fatalities-by-State.pdf . As accessed on August, 2014.  National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 2012. Online: http://www.nwcg.gov/pms/pubs/glossary/s.htm. Accessed July 4, 2014.  O’Brien, M. 2015. 2014 and 2013 Stable understory assessments 31 of 60 stable aspen overstory transect sites - a report to the Monroe Mountain Working Group and Richfield Ranger District, Fishlake National Forest. Grand Canyon Trust. April 2015.  Ogle, K. and V. DuMond. 1997. Presettlement Vegetation on Forest Service lands in the Intermountain Region. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region.129 pp.  Oliver, C.D., and B.C. Larson. 1996. Forest stand dynamics. New York, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 520 p.  Olmstead, C.E. 1979. The ecology of aspen with reference to utilization by large herbivores in Rocky Mountain National Park. In M.S. Boyce, L.D. Hayden-Wing, (eds.) North American Elk: Ecology, Behavior, and Management. University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming. p. 89-97.  Partridge, A. 2015. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project rangeland resource specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 16, 2015.  Petty, Jeff. 2004. Level II riparian survey Fishlake National Forest: Manning Creek. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Petty, Jeff. 2006a. Level II riparian survey Fishlake National Forest: Box Creek. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Petty, Jeff. 2006b. Level II riparian survey Fishlake National Forest: Koosharem Creek Watershed. Shell Valley Consulting. Shell, Wyoming.  Pilliod, D.S. and E. Wind (editors). 2008. Habitat management guidelines for amphibians and reptiles of the northwestern United States and western Canada. Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation, Technical Publication HMG-4, Birmingham, AL. 139pp.  Platts, W. and M. McHenry. 1988. Density and biomass of trout and char in western streams. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, General Technical Report INT-241. 17 p.  Portage. 2007 Central Utah regional wildfire project plan. 2007. Portage, Editors. Idaho Falls, Idaho.126 pp.  Producers Livestock. 2014. Hay sales results May 10, 2014. Producers Livestock Greeley, Colorado. 1 p.  Pyne, S. 2011. Interview with the National Fire Protection Association. Online: http://www.nfpa.org/newsandpublications/nfpa-journal/2011/september- 2011/pov/perspectives . Accessed in March, 2014.  Rasmussen, K. 2015. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project wildlife specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 27, 2015.  Reynolds, R. T., Joy, S. M., Leslie, D. G. 1994. Nest productivity, fidelity, and spacing of northern goshawks in Arizona. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14-15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian Biology. Cooper Ornithological Society; 16: 50-57.  Rieman, B., D. Lee, J. McIntyre, K. Overton, and R. Thurow. 1993. Consideration of extinction risks for salmonids. Fish Habitat Relationships Technical Bulletin No. 14. USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Research Station, Boise, Idaho. 12 pp. (cited in Appendix B)  Rittenhouse, T. A.G. and R.D. Semlitsch. 2007. Distribution of Amphibians in Terrestrial Habitat Surrounding Wetlands. Wetlands 27(1):153-161.  Robertson, S. R. 1997a. The effects of timber harvest and related activities on fish and aquatic macroinvertebrates. Unpublished report. USDA Forest Service, Dixie National Forest, Cedar City, UT. 29 pp.  Robertson, S. R. 1997b. The effects of fire on fish and aquatic macroinvertebrates. Unpublished report. USDA Forest Service, Dixie National Forest, Cedar City, UT. 8 pp.  Rodriguez, R.L. 2006. Life history and analysis of endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive, and management indicator species of the Fishlake National Forest, version 4.1. Compiled by R. Rodriguez. Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  Rodriguez, R. 2012. Life history and analysis of endangered, threatened, candidate, sensitive, and management indicator species of the Dixie National Forest, v.6.0 2011. Cedar City, UT: Dixie National Forest, Supervisor's Office, unpublished report.  Rodriguez, R.L. 2014. Personal communication regarding the past treatments with Northern goshawk PFAs and territory abandonment on the Fishlake and Dixie National Forests. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  Rohner, C. and Doyle, F. I. 1992. Food-stressed great horned owl kills adult goshawk: exceptional observation or community process? Journal of Raptor Research. 26:261-263.  Rosgen, D. 1996. Applied river morphology. Wildland Hydrology. Pagosa Springs, Colorado.  Rothermel, R.C. 1983. How to predict the spread and intensity of forest and range fires. General Technical Report INT-143. Intermountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Ogden, Utah. 84401. 168 pp.  Ryan, K.C. and T.S. Opperman. 2013. LANDFIRE – A national vegetation/fuels data base for use in fuels treatment, restoration, and suppression planning. Forest ecology and Management 294 208-216.  Scott, J.H. and R.E. Burgan. 2005. Standard fire behavior fuel models: a comprehensive set for use with Rothermel’s surface fire spread model. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-153. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 72 p.  Smith J.E., L.S. Heath, K.E. Skog, and R.A. Birdsey. 2006. Methods for calculating forest ecosystem and harvested carbon with standard estimates for forest types of the United States. General Technical Report NE-343.U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station. Portland, Oregon.  Solarik, Kevin A., W. Jan A. Volney, Victor J. Leffers, John R. Spence, and Andreas Hamann. 2012. Factors affecting white spruce and aspen survival after partial harvest. Journal of Applied Ecology. Centre for Enhanced Forest Management, Department of Renewable Resources, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2H1 and Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Northern Forestry Centre, 5320 122 Street, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6H 3S5.  Solt, A. 2015. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project hydrology and soils specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. June 17, 2015.  Squires, J. R.; Reynolds R.T. 1997. Northern goshawk (Accipiter gentilis). In: Poole, A.; Gill, F., eds. Birds of North America, No. 298. Philadelphia, PA: The Academy of Natural Sciences; Washington, DC.: The American Ornithologists' Union. 32 p.  Stam, B.R. et al. 2008. Effect of conifer encroachment into aspen stands on understory biomass. Rangeland Ecology and Management. January 2008. 61(1). Pp. 93-97.  Stam, B.R. et al. 2004. Quantifying losses of understory forage in aspen stands on the Dixie and Fishlake National Forests.” Utah State University, Logan, Utah. Pp. 19-21.  Sutley, N.H. 2010. Draft NEPA guidance on consideration of the effects of climate change and greenhouse gas emissions. Memorandum for Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies. Chair, Council on Environmental Quality. February 18, 2010.  Tait, D. 2014. Monroe Mountain aspen ecosystems restoration project botany specialist report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. September 29, 2014.  Tappeiner, J.C., D.A. Maguire, and T.B Harrington. 2007. Silviculture and ecology of Western U.S. forests. Oregon State University Press, 500 Kerr Administration, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-2122. pg. 20. http://oregonstate.edu/dept/press  Teti, P. 2003. Shade and stream temperature. Streamline Watershed Management Bulletin. 7(4):1-5.  Thomas, J.W., R.G. Anderson, C. Maser, and E.L. Bull. 1979. Snags in wildlife habitats in managed forest, the Blue Mountains of Oregon and Washington. (J.W. Thomas, ed.). Agricultural Handbook. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington Office, Washington, D.C. p. 60-77.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 1976. National Forest Management Act. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington D.C.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 1979. Fishlake National Forest, RARE II evaluation of roadless areas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 1983. Appendix C, NFMA analysis of roadless areas used for Fishlake National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 1986. Land and resource management plan (LRMP) for the Fishlake National Forest. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 1995. Forest Service Manual Washington, Title 2600 – Wildlife, fish, and sensitive plant habitat management, Amendment No. 2600-95-7. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington D.C.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 1998. Fishlake National Forest prescribed natural fire plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2000. Decision notice, finding of no significant impact, and finding of non-significant amendment of the forests in Utah for the Utah northern goshawk project. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service Intermountain Region Ashley, Dixie, Fishlake, Manti-La Sal, Uinta, and Wasatch-Cache National Forests, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2001. Decision notice, finding of no significant impact, and finding of non-significant amendment for the Utah fire amendment project. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ashley, Dixie, Fishlake, Manti-La Sal, Uinta, and Wasatch-Cache National Forests, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2004a. Intermountain Region planning desk guide: a protocol for identifying and evaluating areas for potential wilderness. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2004b. Fishlake National Forest draft undeveloped area evaluation. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2011. FSM 2500, Chapter 2550 – Soil Management. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2012. Updated 1987 Fishlake National Forest travel management plan. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2013. Monroe mountain livestock management improvement project decision notice and finding of no significant impact. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. April 2013.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2014a. Preventing spread of aquatic invasive organisms common to the intermountain region. Operational Guidelines for 2014 Fire Activities. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2014b. Lost Lake monitoring report. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2014c. Concurrence for roadless project review. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah.  U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS). 2014d. Fire technical guidelines for preventing the spread of aquatic invasive organisms. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Washington D.C.  U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of the Interior. 1995. Federal wildland fire management: policy and program review: final report. Washington, D.C.  U.S. Department of the Interior (Bureau of Land Management, National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs), U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, and Utah Forestry, Fire and State Lands. 2014. Utah/Intermountain interagency prescribed fire plan template. 54 pp. http://gacc.nifc.gov/egbc/policy.php.  Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2000. Cutthroat trout management: a position paper – genetic considerations associated with cutthroat trout management. Publication No. 00-26. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah. 9pp.  Utah Division of Wildlife Resources. 2009. Conservation agreement and strategy for southern leatherside (Lepidomeda aliciae) in the State of Utah. Publication No. 09-16. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah. 33pp.  Utah Forest Aspen Restoration Working Group (UFRWG) – Ecology Committee. 2010. [Mary O’Brien, Paul Rogers, Kevin Muller, Rob MacWhorter, Allen Rowley, Bill Hopkin, Bill Christensen, Paul Dremann] Guidelines for aspen restoration on the national forests in Utah. Western Aspen Alliance. Utah State University, Logan, Utah. 48 p.  Vandewege, M.W., T.M. Swannack, K.L. Greuter, D.J. Brown, and M.R.J. Forstner. 2013. Breeding site fidelity and terrestrial movement of an endangered amphibian, the Houston yoad (Bufo houstonensis). Herpetological Conservation and Biology 8(2):435-446.  Walters, J.W., T.E. Hinds, D.W. Johnson, and J. Beatty. 1982. Effects of partial cutting on diseases, mortality, and regeneration of Rocky Mountain aspen stands. Research Paper RM- 240, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. October 1982.  Welsh, S.L., N.D Atwood, S. Goodrich, and L. Higgins, editors. 2003. A Utah flora, third edition, revised. Print Services, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. 912 pp.   Wheeler, K. 2014. WCFO Field Report – Boreal toad breeding surveys, July 21-24, 2014. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City.  Wheeler, K. 2013. WCFO Field Report – Boreal toad inventory surveys, June 19-22, 2013. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City, Utah.  Wheeler, K. and B. McCormick. 2014. WCFO field report – boreal toad inventory surveys, July 8-12, 2014. Utah Department of Natural Resources, Division of Wildlife Resources, Salt Lake City. 14pp.  Whelan, J. E. 2002. Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Monitoring Results of the 1995 and 1996 Rotenone Treatments of Manning Creek, Utah. Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, Publication No. 02-04. Salt Lake City, Utah. 34pp  Whelan, J. E. 2003. Results of the Oldroyd Wildfire North Fork of Box Creek aquatic resources and Straw Wattle treatment effectiveness monitoring 2000-2002. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield, Utah. 22pp.  Whelan, J. 2015. Aquatic specialist report for sensitive and MIS aquatic species for the Monroe Mountain Aspen Ecosystems Restoration Project. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Region 4, Fishlake National Forest, Richfield Ranger District, Richfield, Utah. July 20, 2015.  White, C.A. and M.C. Feller. 2001. Predation risk and elk-aspen foraging patterns. In W. D. Shepperd, W.D. Binkley, D.L. Bartos, T.J. Stohlgren, and L.G. Eskew (comps.) Sustaining Aspen in Western Landscapes: Symposium Proceedings; 13-15 June 2000; Grand Junction, CO. Proceedings RMRS-P-18. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. p. 61-80.  Williams, C.K. (ret). 2009. Properly Functioning Condition. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Intermountain Region, Ogden, Utah. December 2009.  Woodbridge, B. and Detrich, P. J. 1994. Territory occupancy and habitat patch size of northern goshawks in the southern Cascades of California. In: Block, W. M.; Morrison, M. L.; Reiser, M. H., eds. The northern goshawk: ecology and management: Proceedings of a symposium of the Cooper Ornithological Society; 1993 April 14- 15; Sacramento, CA. Studies in Avian biology. Cooper Ornithological Society 16: 83-87.  Younk, J.V. and M.J. Bechard. 1994. Breeding ecology of the northern goshawk in highelevation aspen forest of northern Nevada. Studies in Avian Biology. 16:119-121.  Zachel, C. R. 1985. Food habits, hunting activity, and post-fledgling behavior of northern goshawks (Accipiter gentilis) in interior Alaska. Fairbanks: University of Alaska. 81 p. Thesis. 