Final Environmental Impact Statement
U.S. Department of State
November 2017
Washington, D.C.
DOS-DC-EIS-14-01-F

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Final Environmental Impact Statement
U.S. Department of State
November 2017
Washington, D.C.
DOS-DC-EIS-14-01-F
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) proposes to develop a Foreign Missions Center (FMC) on the northwest
portion of the former Walter Reed Army Medical Center on 16th Street in Northwest Washington, DC. DOS is
seeking to redevelop 31.7 acres for the construction of new chancery buildings by foreign governments. DOS
acquired the land under the Foreign Missions Act of 1982 (U.S.C. 4301-4316), which facilitates the conduct
of diplomacy and consular operations between the United States and foreign governments.
This Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) was prepared in accordance with the National Environmental
Policy Act 42 U.S.C. 4321-4347 and examines the potential environmental impacts of a “no-action” alternative
and seven alternatives to develop the FMC. The purpose of this FEIS is to provide DOS, other agencies, and the
public with a full accounting of the potential environmental impacts prior to decision-making. Subsequent to
the publication of the original Draft Environmental Impact Statement, the total acreage of the land available for
transfer from the Army to DOS was reduced from 43.5 to 31.7 acres through the National Defense Authorization
Act of 2015. Because of the change in the proposed action, DOS prepared a Supplemental Draft Environmental
Impact Statement, revised to become this FEIS, to describe the new preferred alternative, and evaluate any
change in potential impacts from the reduction in size of the proposed action. It serves as the primary document
to facilitate review of the proposed action by federal, District of Columbia, and local agencies, and the public.
After careful consideration of a range of reasonable alternatives, DOS has identified an action alternative that
it believes would best fulfill the purpose and needs of its statutory mission and responsibilities, and has the
least adverse environmental impact.

For more information contact:
Geoffrey Hunt
Department of State
A/OPR/RPM
HST Room 1264
Washington, D.C. 20520-1264
(202) 351-9077

Adam H. Bodner, Director						
Office of Real Property Management
U.S. Department of State

November, 8, 2017

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Department of State (DOS) is the federal executive agency responsible for the international
relations of the United States. DOS has a number of domestic and international responsibilities
associated with the establishment and operation of foreign missions in the United States. DOS
is responsible for assisting foreign missions to identify properties on which they may locate and
operate chanceries in the United States.
The availability of adequate space for the construction and operation of chanceries by foreign
missions has been a long-standing challenge in Washington, DC. In anticipation of needing
to develop another site similar to the International Chancery Center (ICC), DOS undertook a
multiyear evaluation of available land parcels within Washington, DC and concluded that the
former Walter Reed Army Medical Center (WRAMC) site was best suited to support the Foreign
Missions Center (FMC) concept.

PROJECT OVERVIEW
Proposed Action

The proposed action is to prepare a master plan for the long-term development of a FMC on
approximately 31.7 acres of the former WRAMC site at 16th Street, between Aspen Street
and Alaska Avenue in the District of Columbia (Exhibit S.1). The proposed action consists of
assignment of federal land to foreign missions for the purpose of constructing and operating
new chancery facilities. DOS would manage the FMC, including maintaining common areas.
The proposed FMC was conceptually planned to complement the campus character and be
consistent with current and future adjacent land uses by:
1. Designing each lot access point to be placed on internal roadways of the campus;
2. Allowing public access to the proposed streets and parks within the site;
3. Developing a reuse program for one historic building and maximizing the potential for
reuse of other historic buildings;
4. Maintaining a greater than 30-foot setback between the southern boundary of the site
and historic Main Drive;
5. Emphasizing vehicular and pedestrian connections between the DOS portion and the
adjacent land uses; and
6. Maintaining a 50-foot vegetated buffer on the west boundary of the site, and preserving
the tree canopy to the maximum extent possible.
DOS anticipates a maximum of 15 chanceries will be established at the FMC. Countries would
have the option to combine lots if desired. The lots would range in lot size. The lots south of

Page i

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit S.1 - Study Area
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary

FERN STREET

Rock Creek
Park

16TH STREET

AL

GEORGIA AVEN
UE

AS

KA

AV
E

NU

E

14TH STREET

13TH STREET

Study Area Boundary

DAHLIA STREET

MAIN DRIVE

13TH STREET

E
NU
AV
E
LU
ZO
N

14TH STREET

ASPEN STREET

N

0’

Page ii

400’

800’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Dahlia Street are envisioned by DOS to be larger with the expectation that foreign missions may
construct several buildings, creating a compound. The lots along and north of Dahlia Street are
envisioned to be closer together, resulting in a denser development. Each foreign mission would
be responsible for meeting parking needs (employee and visitor) on its individual lot. On-street
parking would not be permitted. Specific lot development guidelines (such as minimal building
setbacks, building lot coverage, maximum building height, and floor-to-area ratio) would be
dependent upon the lot’s location.
The primary vehicle entrance would be at the intersection of Main Drive and 14th Street. Other
vehicle entrances would be at Alaska Avenue and Dahlia Street, and Dahlia Street. Streets internal
to the FMC would be private, and owned and maintained by the federal government. Primary
streets (14th Street and Dahlia Street) would consist of one travel lane and one bike lane in
each direction. Wider sidewalks would be located on both sides of primary streets. Intersections
would be controlled with stop signs. The FMC will be open to public transit.
The existing historic perimeter fence along the 16th Street and Alaska Avenue frontages would be
retained. Each foreign mission would be responsible for the perimeter security of its individual
lot. The design guidelines state that the maximum height for private frontage fences on individual
lots shall be no greater than three meters above the finish grade of the sidewalk (Appendix C).
Utilities at the FMC would include domestic water, stormwater drainage and treatment, sanitary
sewerage, data and telecommunications, electrical power, natural gas, and street lighting. The
stormwater system for roads would connect to the District of Columbia system. Utilities would
be underground and utility service would be provided to each lot.
Foreign missions would fully fund DOS’s upfront infrastructure development costs through
the revenue generated from the assignment of lots. The proposed action would be built over
approximately 15-20 years.

Purpose
The purpose of the proposed action is to prepare a master plan for the long-term development of
a FMC, under authorities of the Foreign Missions Act of 1982 (FMA), on the site of the former
WRAMC in the District of Columbia. The master plan is intended to guide the development of
a cohesive campus by establishing design and land-use planning principles for the construction
of new buildings, roadways, open green space, and utilities, while minimizing environmental
impacts.

Need
The need for the proposed action is based on increased and high demand for foreign mission
facilities in the District of Columbia, a lack of large sites for foreign mission development or
redevelopment in the District, and the need for land to use in property exchanges with other
countries. This scarcity has impacted DOS’s ability to acquire properties in foreign nations.

Page iii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

DOS has an urgent need to meet the demand from foreign missions for modern and secure
facilities within the nation’s capital. World events such as the collapses in the 1990s of both
the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia resulted in the creation of 21 new countries. Further, the
rapid growth and prominence of countries such as Brazil, China, India, and Vietnam have had
a significant impact on the diplomatic presence of such governments, as well as on DOS’s
reciprocal presence and operations in those countries.
In accordance with the FMA, DOS enters into property exchange agreements with other countries,
whereby property is provided to foreign governments for the establishment of missions in
exchange for DOS receiving similar property within their countries. In addition to the FMA, the
1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations mandates that signatory nations, including
the United States, must facilitate the acquisition of premises for foreign missions. However, the
lack of suitable land for development or redevelopment and a full ICC have inhibited DOS’s
ability to reciprocate.
DOS has a need to resolve stalled attempts to acquire property in certain countries to construct
adequate and secure facilities for the conduct of American diplomacy and consular operations.

SCOPING AND EARLY COORDINATION
Scoping letters were mailed in June 2012 to agencies with jurisdiction over features in the study
area or an interest in the study and its results, in accordance with the procedural provisions
of National Environmental Policy Act and the DOS’s requirements and policies for early
coordination.
A public scoping meeting was held July 19, 2012, in the District of Columbia. It was an open
house with displays, a presentation, and an area for public comments and questions to be submitted
for consideration in the planning of the proposed action and preparation of the Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS). During the 30-day scoping period, the key issues of concern identified by
the public were the preservation of trees and open space, traffic impacts, noise impacts, historic
preservation and security.
The master plan study was developed in conjunction with federal and district agencies with
jurisdiction over features or an interest in the study area through a series of meetings.
In compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (NHPA), consulting
parties were identified to consult on potential effects to historic resources and measures to minimize
and mitigate them. Consulting parties included the District of Columbia Historic Preservation
Office (DC-HPO), National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC), Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation (ACHP), National Park Service - Rock Creek Park, The Committee of 100 on the
Federal City, and The Alliance to Preserve the Civil War Defenses of Washington (APCWDW).

Page iv

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

ALTERNATIVES RETAINED FOR FURTHER
CONSIDERATION
The DOS identified, developed, and analyzed the No Action Alternative and seven action
alternatives that could potentially satisfy the proposed action’s purpose and needs. Alternatives
were developed through collaborative planning and design work sessions with other federal
and district agencies with direct or indirect jurisdiction over the proposed action, or an interest
or special expertise, at key milestones to receive feedback and suggestions for improvement.
Components common to the action alternatives consisted of cost-neutral funding, a minimum
50-year design life for utilities, on-lot stormwater management, parking considerations, and
street design. Site and individual lot development parameters (size, floor area ratio, building
coverage, and height restrictions) developed for each campus zone did not vary between the
action alternatives. Under the action alternatives, the existing historic perimeter fence would be
retained and the existing landscape on the west boundary enhanced to create a vegetated buffer,
and maximize the tree canopy in this area. Access points for individual lots would be placed
on internal roadways.
During the alternatives development process, six action alternatives were considered and four
were dismissed. The Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) Preferred Action Alternative
and the No Action Alternative were retained for further consideration and more detailed analysis.
Subsequent to the publication of the original DEIS, the total acreage of the land available for
transfer from the Army to DOS was reduced from 43.5 to 31.7 acres through the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2015. DOS, in coordination with U.S. Commission of Fine Arts, NCPC,
DC-HPO, and District of Columbia Department of Transportation (DDOT), then developed
Alternative 7, which has been identified as the Final Draft Environmental Impact Statement
(FEIS) Selected Action Alternative.
DOS believes the Selected Action Alternative would best fulfill its statutory mission and responsibilities, while giving consideration to economic, environmental, technical, and other factors.
In identifying its FEIS Selected Action Alternative, DOS has identified the environmentally
preferable alternative because it best meets the purpose and needs of the study; causes the least
damage to the biological and physical environment; and best protects, preserves, and enhances
the historic, cultural, and natural resources of the study area.

The No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, DOS would not take ownership of the 31.7-acre portion of
the former WRAMC and would not create a master plan to develop the FMC. DOS would
continue to face challenges in facilitating the provision of adequate and secure facilities for
foreign missions. The lack of readily available parcels within the District of Columbia for
the development of foreign mission facilities would persist, and the high demand for foreign
mission facilities would continue to grow. DOS's inability to reciprocally acquire properties in
other countries would increase, and delays in updating U.S. diplomatic and consular properties
abroad to meet modern security requirements would continue.

Page v

Final Environmental Impact Statement

The No Action Alternative was retained for detailed study and the consequences of the No
Action Alternative were fully developed for the year 2032 to demonstrate the full impact of
taking no action. This provides a baseline comparison with the action alternatives. The year 2032
represents the earliest completion of the planned build-out of the FMC over an approximate
15-20-year period.

Alternative 7: Selected Action Alternative
Alternative 7 was identified as the Selected Action Alternative because it furthers the purpose
of the project and satisfies the needs for the project while best maintaining and enhancing the
existing site character of the former WRAMC; addressing community concerns raised during
scoping; minimizing potential impacts to cultural resources; and maximizing marketability by
allowing the greatest flexibility in developing the site (Exhibit S.2).
The Selected Action Alternative would provide a maximum of 15 lots for chancery development.
Two or three smaller lots would surround the chapel. This design compliments the urban
development pattern planned by Children's National Medical Center (CNMC) and District
of Columbia's Walter Reed Army Medical Center Local Redevelopment Authority for this
zone of the former WRAMC. The design for this quadrant also allows for tree coverage and
accommodates the vegetative buffer along Alaska Avenue. Green space would surround the
chapel to maintain its setting.
The section of 14th Street north of Dahlia Street would be moved approximately 30 feet to the
east to provide sufficient lot sizes in the northwest quadrant. The end of 14th Street is planned
to terminate in a cul-de-sac centered on Building 54/Armed Forces Institute of Pathology’s
(AFIP) main entrance. Building 54, a historic district contributing resource located on the CNMC
portion of the former WRAMC, is planned to be reused as a research laboratory. Access from
the 14th Street cul-de-sac to Alaska Avenue would be through a 25-foot wide paved access path
that would accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.
On the southeastern portion of the site, Building 40/Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
and historic Building 41/Old Red Cross Building, both contributing resources to the WRAMC
Historic District, could remain for potential adaptive reuse, depending on marketability. During
project coordination meetings, interest was expressed by foreign missions in reusing Building 20/
Mologne House, Building 56/Fisher House No. 3, and Building 32/Wagner Sports Center, which
are not historic district contributing resources. Several parcelization options under the Selected
Action Alternative are provided to increase flexibility and allow for the reuse or expansion of these
existing buildings.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, Dahlia Street and 14th Street would be developed as
boulevards supporting pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic connections to the surrounding
neighborhoods. In the southwest quadrant, the boulevard landscaping bordering 14th Street
would be widened to create green space. This low-lying green space along with tree boxes
between the streets and sidewalks would assist with the filtration of rain water from the FMC,

Page vi

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit S.2 - Selected Action Alternative (Option C)
Legend
Potential Lot Boundaries
Project Area Boundary
Green Spaces
Trees
Tree Canopy
Potentially Reusable Buildings
Existing Building to Remain

Variation: 15 lots

N

Not to Scale

Page vii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

reducing stormwater runoff. Several parcelization options are shown for this quadrant to provide
marketing flexibility and respond to foreign missions’ expressed interest in reusing non-historic
Building 56/Fisher House #3.

ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BUT ELIMINATED
FROM DETAILED STUDY
Six other action alternatives were developed during the alternatives identification process but
dismissed from further consideration and detailed study. Alternative 1 (the DEIS Preferred
Action Alternative) was dismissed from detailed study within the SDEIS because it was no
longer viable given the change in total acreage required by the National Defense Authorization
Act of 2015. Under the design for Alternative 1, the 31.7 remaining acres would have provided
between four to seven chancery lots, which would be insufficient to meet the purpose and need
for the project. Alternatives 1-6 are described in detail in the DEIS.

AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT AND IMPACTS TO THE
NATURAL AND SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
DOS developed a study area of approximately 350 acres for the consideration of potential
impacts to the social and economic environments in the area; a smaller area was used for the
consideration of potential impacts to the natural environment. The study area not only covers
the land that would be used for the Selected Action Alternative, but also the area that would
potentially experience direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts from it.

Vegetation
A detailed tree inventory of the area potentially affected by the Selected Action Alternative was
performed; approximately 560 trees were identified, the tree sizes were recorded by diameter at
breast height measured 4.5 feet above the ground. Approximately 84 trees qualified as Heritage
Trees and 226 qualified as Special Trees (Exhibit S.3).
The No Action Alternative would not impact vegetation.
The Selected Action Alternative would impact vegetation by removing some existing trees,
including Heritage and Special Trees. The impact to trees would be minimized by maintaining
a 50-foot wide vegetative buffer along Alaska Avenue, Fern Street, and 16th Street. DOS would
retain all trees in fair to excellent condition, including Heritage and Special Trees, within the
buffer zone and the public open space. Approximately 15 of the 84 Heritage Trees and 47 of the
226 Special Trees inventoried across the site were designated as poor to very poor condition and
would be removed. On the DOS-controlled portion of the site, if a poor to very poor Heritage
or Special Tree is removed, replacement trees would be planted along streets and within the
vegetative buffer to offset the loss at the ratio defined in the DDOT guidance. DOS would use a
licensed arborist to identify necessary tree removals, protected trees, and to supervise new tree

Page viii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit S.3 - Existing Trees
Legend
Project Area Boundary
Projected Lot Boundaries
Heritage Tree Critical
Root Zone
Non-Heritage Tree Critical
Root Zone

X

Existing Tree in Poor Condition
or Undesirable Species
50-foot Vegetated Buﬀer Zone

N

0’

90’

180’

Page ix

Final Environmental Impact Statement

planting on the property. District statutes and Sustainable DC goals would be used as a general
framework for tree management on the site.
Heritage Trees and their associated critical root-zone will be identified by DOS for each chancery
lot. DOS would encourage foreign missions, through lot development guidelines and lease
agreements, to protect, and if needed, replace Heritage and Special Trees in accordance with the
intent of the Urban Forest Preservation Act. Requirements and guidelines for retaining the tree
canopy on chancery parcels are included in the FMC design guidelines that are supplemental to
the lease agreement between DOS and the respective chanceries (Appendix C).
The Selected Action Alternative would affect vegetation by removing maintained landscape
and understory dominated by invasive species. Landscape guidelines for the DOS- and foreign
mission-controlled portions of the site include the recommendation to use native or adapted
species. The Selected Action Alternative master plan design guidelines require each street within
the FMC to be lined with trees from the DDOT’s Urban Forestry Administration recommended
tree list (Appendix C). The trees will be located in tree boxes that would include bioretention
elements in support of the stormwater management plan for DOS common areas.

Traffic and Transportation Facilities
The streets in the study area are generally designed as a grid pattern, with a few roads that bisect
the network diagonally. Intersections are at regular intervals and most streets in the study area
provide two-way travel. The street network provides good traffic circulation throughout it,
allowing for multiple routing options for drivers and dispersing vehicles throughout the study
area. The primary streets in the study area are: 13th Street, 14th Street, 16th Street, Alaska
Avenue, Aspen Street, Dahlia Street, Fern Street, Georgia Avenue, and Luzon Avenue.
On-street parking is provided throughout the study area along all streets. Most parking spaces
require residential parking permits, though some spaces are metered or unregulated. Other
on-street parking is generally prohibited during peak periods (typically 7:00 to 9:30 a.m. and
4:00 to 6:30 p.m.), but unregulated during off-peak periods.
The No Action Alternative would not impact access or parking.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, the primary vehicle entrance for the FMC would be at the
intersection of Main Drive and 14th Street. Other vehicle entrances would be at the intersection
of Alaska Avenue and Dahlia Street and at Dahlia Street. The driveways would be stop controlled.
Access points where bus service is anticipated would be designed to Washington Metropolitan
Area Transit Authority (WMATA) guidelines. Vehicular site access to each chancery would be
designed to meet DDOT standards as described in the design guidelines for the site (Appendix C).
A DDOT permit would be required to connect the FMC to the District’s road network.
Each chancery would be required to provide a Transportation Management Plan (TMP) to be
reviewed by DDOT during chancery design. The TMP would include Transportation Demand

Page x

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Management (TDM) elements to recommend to chanceries to promote non-auto travel. TDM
typically focuses on reducing the demand of single-occupancy private vehicles during peak
period travel times or on shifting single-occupancy vehicular demand to off-peak periods or
other modes of transportation. The implementation of TDM strategies for each parcel would be
dependent on the needs and policies of the foreign government lessee. DOS would coordinate
with DDOT to develop an acceptable list of chancery-level TDM elements.
The FMC Master Plan specifies that the majority of parking be provided in below-grade lots.
Each foreign mission would be required to meet 100 percent of its parking needs within its lot
at time of occupancy and at 10 years after occupancy. Existing buildings that are reused would
be required to develop independent below-grade parking solutions and new buildings would
need to incorporate parking within their lot in below-grade structures. Under the Selected Action
Alternative, on-street parking within internal FMC roadways would not be permitted. Current
parking allowances on internal FMC roadways would be removed upon implementation of
the Selected Action Alternative. The parking garage associated with the CNMC exceeds the
parking needs of the CNMC; therefore, excess parking spaces within the existing garage may
be an option for additional parking.
The existing conditions in and around the former WRAMC were characterized to provide a
foundation for assessing the transportation implications of the Selected Action Alternative. This
was determined by examining the peak traffic hours. The “peak hour” represents the worst-case
scenario, when the system traffic volumes are the highest. The use of a typical weekday morning
and afternoon peak hours ensures that conclusions regarding adverse impacts and their respective
mitigation measures would apply to the vast majority of the time the roads are used in the study
area. Traffic counts were conducted at 13 intersections between the hours of 6:30 and 9:30 a.m.
and between 4:00 and 7:00 p.m. on typical weekdays including normal operations of other major
traffic generators in the study area.
The No Action Alternative includes the traffic generated by other developments near the study
area and inherent growth on the roads. Growth from these two sources was added to the existing
traffic volumes to determine the traffic projections for the future No Action Alternative.
Trip generation for the chanceries was estimated based on existing traffic volumes collected
adjacent to the ICC (Exhibit S.4). The traffic volumes for the Selected Action Alternative were
calculated by adding the development-generated traffic volumes to the year 2032 for the No
Action Alternative. The Selected Action Alternative was considered to have an impact at an
intersection if the capacity analyses showed a level of service (LOS) of E or F at an intersection
or along an approach with the proposed action where one does not exist in the future conditions
for the No Action Alternative. Based on these criteria, the following intersections will be impacted
by the FMC development:
◊

16th Street & Alaska Avenue

◊

16th Street & Aspen Street

Page xi

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit S.4 - Selected Action Alternative Generated Traffic Volumes (2032)

Page xii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

16th Street & Main Drive

◊

Georgia Avenue & Butternut Street

◊

Georgia Avenue & Dahlia Street

◊

Dahlia Street & Alaska Avenue

The Selected Action Alternative would result in a LOS E or F at the following intersections and
approaches near the former WRAMC:
◊

16th Street & Van Buren Street (both intersections)

◊

Georgia Avenue & Van Buren Street (eastbound morning and evening)

◊

Georgia Avenue & Fern Place (westbound morning and evening)

In each case where the Selected Action Alternative would result in a LOS E or F at an intersection
and approach, signal retiming or changes in a lane approaching an intersection would improve
the traffic flow at the intersection.
Heavy vehicle access to the former WRAMC, during both the construction and operations
phases, would be restricted to Dahlia Street via Georgia Avenue or Main Drive via 16th Street.
Given these access points, each of the driveways along Georgia Avenue and 16th Street would
be required to be designed to meet DDOT acceptable standards for heavy vehicle accessibility
including providing adequate turning radii, limiting visual impediments, and ensuring traffic
does not oppose vehicles entering and exiting the former WRAMC. Service for trash, recycling,
and deliveries would occur regularly. Chancery building design would focus loading/unloading
operations away from public streets and major pedestrian accessways.
The No Action Alternative would not impact transit services.
The Selected Action Alternative would increase use in both Metrorail and Metrobus. Under the
Selected Action Alternative, all through streets within the FMC would be able to accommodate
buses should bus routes and/or stops be considered in the future by DDOT or WMATA. Most
pedestrians accessing the former WRAMC arrive from adjacent residential neighborhoods to the
north and south, bus stops along 16th Street and Georgia Avenue, or from the Takoma Metrorail
Station. Nearly all streets in the study area have sidewalks, planted buffers between sidewalks
and the curb, and on-street parking that provide an additional buffer between pedestrians and
vehicular traffic. Existing deficiencies are along Aspen Street which provides sidewalks only
in sections along the southern portion of the road and Luzon Avenue which does not provide
sidewalks on the eastern side of the road.
The No Action Alternative would not impact pedestrian facilities.

Page xiii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Development on the former WRAMC would result in increased pedestrian traffic. Increased
pedestrian activity along sidewalks and at intersections may warrant upgrades or changes to
existing facilities to mitigate impacts.
The Selected Action Alternative would provide pedestrian walkways on federal government-owned
streets. DOS would coordinate with DDOT to support the provision of pedestrian facilities at access
points, including expanding sidewalk widths, removing obstructions, installing and upgrading
crosswalks at intersections, and installing Leading Pedestrian Intervals and traffic calming measures.
The former WRAMC is served by an area with multiuse trails, signed bicycle routes, and local
streets that accommodate cycling. The bicycle network generally provides good conditions for
local trips and there are several routes for trips between the study area and Silver Spring, Takoma
Park, and other destinations in Northwest Washington, DC.
The Selected Action Alternative would impact bicycle facilities by increasing bicycle parking
and storage, as well as demand for Capital Bikeshare docks and facilities in or near the former
WRAMC, new cycling routes, extensions to existing cycling routes, and increased safety and
visibility for cyclists. DOS would design internal FMC roadways to accommodate bicycle travel,
design shared-use trails to be 10 feet or wider, and provide land, installation, and first year’s
funding expenses for a Capital Bikeshare station on the FMC property. DOS would also fund
the installation and first year's operating expenses for a second Capital Bikeshare station at the
Takoma Metrorail station or in the adjacent neighborhood. Chanceries would be expected to
substantially comply with District zoning regulations related to bicycle commuting.

Noise
Noise measurements and concurrent traffic counts were conducted throughout the study area
(traffic counts were updated in the spring of 2014).
The Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA) Traffic Noise Model (TNM), Version 2.5, which
predicts noise levels at selected locations based on traffic data, roadway design, topographic
features, and the relationship of the analysis site to nearby roadways, was used to model potential
noise impacts for the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives. The percentages of automobiles,
medium trucks, and heavy trucks used in the FHWA’s TNM were developed from review of
traffic classification data obtained during the noise measurement periods corresponding to the
periods of highest noise levels.
Under the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives, noise levels in the study area are predicted
to remain constant at Activity Category B (residential level) for most sites modeled. Noise levels
are predicted to increase to Activity Category C (institutional level, e.g., schools and recreation
areas) at 14 of the 58 sites modeled. The majority of the impacted receptors are along Georgia
Avenue. These “increase over existing” noise levels were generally the result of normal traffic
growth predicted to occur between 2012 and 2032. Therefore, projected noise impacts do not
differ perceptibly between the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives.

Page xiv

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Based on the amount of direct access along the corridor and limited right-of-way, constructing
noise barriers is not feasible.

Cultural Resources
The NHPA established a program to preserve historic properties throughout the country. Section
106 of the NHPA, as amended, requires that federal agencies review undertakings for their
impact on significant historic resources. The term historic includes architectural, archaeological,
and landscape resources. A significant historic resource is one that is either listed or determined
eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The NRHP is the federally
maintained list of properties recognized for their significance in American history, architecture,
archaeology, engineering, and culture. The criteria for evaluating the eligibility of properties
for inclusion on the NRHP are established by the Secretary of the Interior.
When a historic district is nominated, the submission includes an evaluation of every structure
within the district boundary and identifies each as either a contributing resource to the historic
district or a noncontributing resource. The Section 106 process includes the evaluation of potential
adverse effects on all contributing resources.

Section 106 Process

Prior to the initiation of the current study, the closure of the WRAMC, under the 2005 Base
Realignment and Closure Act process, made that undertaking subject to review under Section
106 of the NHPA. The Department of the Army Section 106 process was initiated in February
2010. An assessment was developed identifying the historic resources within the WRAMC and
consulting parties were identified. This process included a series of public meetings between
March and August 2010.
The outcome of the Army Section 106 process was a Programmatic Agreement (PA) executed
between the Army, the DC-HPO and the ACHP (Appendix A). The PA, signed in January 2013,
includes a series of stipulations that take into account the effects of the Army undertaking on
the identified historic properties. With the November 2015 completion of the property transfer
from Army to DOS, the stipulations in the Army PA that pertain to the DOS FMC property are
terminated for the FMC portion of the site. A new PA based on the proposed undertaking by the
DOS is being developed and could incorporate certain stipulations from the Army PA.
The Section 106 process for the proposed DOS undertaking was initiated in June 2012. The
DC-HPO, ACHP, NCPC, Committee of 100 on the Federal City, APCWDW and National Park
Service (NPS) – Rock Creek Park have been identified as consulting parties. DOS, with DC-HPO
and ACHP, are preparing a PA for the undertaking and continue to work with and seek input from
the other consulting parties (Appendix D).

Historic Significance of WRAMC
The former WRAMC has been added to the DC Inventory of Historic Sites and the NRHP. The
district consists of 41 contributing buildings (32 non-contributing) and 8 contributing structures (17

Page xv

Final Environmental Impact Statement

noncontributing), as per the accepted National Register Nomination. The Area of Potential Effects
(APE) for the aboveground historic resources is comprised of the entire WRAMC facility and extends
approximately 1,250 feet (four city blocks) to the north and west. It extends into Rock Creek Park along
16th Street, and is bounded to the north by Hemlock Street, until its intersection with 13th Street. East
of 13th Street it is enclosed by Fern Street to Georgia Avenue in the east and Aspen Street to the south
(Exhibits S.5 & S.6).
The WRAMC Historic District was added to the NRHP due to its significance in the field of military
medicine and its architecture and design. The Walter Reed General Hospital, one of the oldest
general military hospitals in the country, played a key role in the treatment and rehabilitation of
America’s soldiers in all major U.S. conflicts since World War I. The Army Medical School was
responsible for training Army physicians in military medicine and public health and advancing
military medical care through research. The AFIP is internationally renowned for its research on
pathology and the study of disease.
The period of significance for the WRAMC Historic District is July 11-12, 1864 and 1909- 1956.
The earlier dates relate to the Civil War Battle of Fort Stevens. The later period of significance
begins in 1909, the opening date of the Main Hospital Building, and ends in 1956. The end
date relates to changes within the military medical structure that resulted in similar or parallel
installations being created elsewhere in the United States.

The Battle of Fort Stevens

Fort Stevens was one of a protective ring of forts that were created around Washington, DC at
the start of the Civil War. While Fort Stevens is over one-half mile south of the WRAMC site,
there was battle activity that occurred north of what is now Aspen Street, the southern boundary
of the historic district. The battle is the only engagement of the Civil War which occurred within
the boundaries of the national capital.

Effects to Historic Resources

The No Action Alternative would not affect historic resources. Over time, the No Action
Alternative would result in the continued deterioration of historic resources.
While the property that is proposed to be used as the FMC is comprised of just a portion of the
historic WRAMC campus, the primary historic resource against which effects must be evaluated
is the entire historic district. It has been emphasized that effects must be considered for the historic
district as a whole. A comprehensive evaluation process of the contributing resources within the
FMC boundary was performed. This process was focused on avoiding and minimizing adverse
impacts on historic buildings through reuse.
The Selected Action Alternative proposes some definitive actions that would result in adverse
effects on historic resources, as well as potential actions where the effect would be dependent on
whether DOS finds foreign mission partners that are interested in renovating a historic resource
for a new programmatic use. The residential properties at the western portion of the site (Buildings
19, 21, 22, 25, 26, 29, 29A, 30, and 35) have been identified for removal. Buildings 40 and 41

Page xvi

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit S.5 - Area of Potential Effect for Historic Resources
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Area of Potential Eﬀect

N

0’

400’

800’

Page xvii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit S.6 - Historic Resources
Legend
Former WRAMC Campus/
Historic District Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Contributing Resource: Building
Contributing Resource: Landscape
Ineligible Building on FMC Site
Contributing Resource: Fence
Contributing Resource: Gate Post

N

0’

Page xviii

250’

500’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

will be offered to potential lessees with the objective that they will be renovated. Building 57
will be retained and repurposed with DOS retaining control of the building. The perimeter fence
and gates will be retained, although some modifications may be required to accommodate current
functional requirements.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, the “worst-case scenario” is that of the contributing
resources within the FMC boundary, only Building 57 and the perimeter fence would be retained.
The following evaluation is based on this scenario.

Rock Creek Park

The Selected Action Alternative would have no direct adverse effect on Rock Creek Park.
The Selected Action Alternative may have an indirect adverse effect on Rock Creek Park. The
redevelopment of the FMC site by DOS (and the remainder of the WRAMC by other entities)
will attract many new visitors to the property that may cross 16th Street NW to enter Rock Creek
Park. While Sherrill Drive, located directly across from Aspen Street, offers vehicular access
to the park, it is narrow and not safe for use by pedestrians except on weekends and holidays
when it is closed to vehicular traffic. The closest pedestrian trailhead access points to the park
are three blocks north (at Holly Street) and two blocks south (at Whittier Street). Lacking a safe
entry point, some pedestrians may create unauthorized “social” trails through the woods which
may lead to erosion and other damage to the park resources.

WRAMC Historic District

Implementation of the Selected Action Alternative would result in an adverse effect to the
WRAMC Historic District. The integrity of a historic district is based on the setting, design, and
association of the component parts. These are linked to the identifiable boundary, the arterial
system within the campus, and the surviving resources constructed between 1909 and 1956.
The boundary and arterial system would be retained and reinforced as part of the proposed
undertaking. The Selected Action Alternative would retain and reinforce the primary vehicular
artery of Dahlia Street (east-west). The section of 14th Street north of Dahlia Street would be
moved approximately 30 feet to the east, and 14th Street between Main Drive and Dahlia Street
would be modified to incorporate a landscaped median element that will also serve as a bioswale.
North of Dahlia Street, 14th Street would terminate in a cul-de-sac centered on Building 54. The
Alaska Avenue gate would be closed to vehicles, although pedestrian and bicycle access would
be maintained. While these are changes from the internal road system that existed in 1956, they
are in keeping with the changes that occurred throughout the period of significance and are not
considered an adverse effect to the historic district.
The majority of noncontributing structures within the FMC project boundary would be removed
to provide lots for new construction. Noncontributing Buildings 20, 32, and 56 may be reused,
depending on interest from foreign missions. The siting, massing, and general design approach
to new construction will be guided both by the guidelines issued by the DC-HPO for new
construction in a historic district and specific design guidelines that have been developed for
the master plan (Appendix C).

Page xix

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Removal of the residential structures on the west portion of the campus will have both a direct
adverse effect, the loss of contributing resources, and an indirect adverse effect on the overall
historic district. Removal would eliminate the buildings' historic location, setting, design
materials, workmanship, feeling, and association with other historic district buildings. These
buildings were not purpose built for WRAMC; they were absorbed as the campus grew and
utilized as Officers’ Housing. There is limited visual connection between these buildings and
the core of the historic district, Building 1 (the Main Hospital), but they do represent an aspect
of the history and development of the WRAMC.
The potential loss of Buildings 40 and 41 would be both a direct adverse effect, the loss of
contributing resources, and the direct adverse effect on the overall historic district. Removal would
eliminate the buildings’ historic location, setting, design materials, workmanship, feeling, and
association with other buildings within the historic district. While the history of the development
of the WRAMC campus was mostly organic, driven by needs during periods of international
conflict, the one planned formal arrangement on the campus that has survived is the relationship
between Buildings 1, 40, and 41. The landscaped open space that was formed by these three
buildings has been lost with the insertion of new buildings, but the loss of Buildings 40 and 41
would adversely affect the reading of the campus plan as it was developed between the World Wars.
The Selected Action Alternative provides for the reuse of Building 57/Memorial Chapel, but
may have an adverse effect on the resource. The programmatic use of the facility has not been
finalized. Prior to reuse, modifications would be required to comply with building code, incorporate
programmatic needs, and provide necessary support spaces (toilet rooms, kitchenette, etc.). These
modifications could have an adverse effect on character-defining features. Removal or replacement
of features could have an adverse effect on the materials and workmanship of the resource.
The Selected Action Alternative may result in an adverse effect to the perimeter fence. The
Selected Action Alternative retains the perimeter fence on 16th Street and Alaska Avenue within
the project area boundary. Existing gates and gate posts at Main Drive (north side of the gate),
Dahlia Street, and 14th Street would remain in their current locations.
The Selected Action Alternative would have no adverse effect on Main Drive. The Selected Action
Alternative includes curb cuts to the northern edge of Main Drive for access to new construction.
The configuration and detailing of the north side of Main Drive would not be changed.

Mitigation

A set of design guidelines have been developed that are specific to the FMC development
(Appendix C). These guidelines will work in coordination with the standard design guidelines
that have been established by the DC-HPO for the renovation of contributing buildings or the
construction of new buildings within a historic district.
Design review of the individual site developments by foreign missions will be undertaken by
NCPC utilizing the process established by the FMA.

Page xx

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

As part of the development plan for the FMC, DOS is offering both Buildings 40 and 41 for
reuse. This effort includes the development of marketing materials that will be made available
to interested foreign missions.
Mitigation strategies for historic buildings that are demolished may include documentation of the
buildings prior to removal including historic research, drawings, and photographs in accordance
with Executive Order 11593. This effort would build upon the documentation effort that was
undertaken by the Department of the Army under their PA.
DOS will coordinate with the NPS on improvements for directional signage along 16th Street
NW regarding access, vehicular and pedestrian, to Rock Creek Park.

Archaeological Resources

The APE for archaeological resources is comprised of the 31.7 acres transferred to DOS at the
northwest corner of the 115-acre WRAMC facility. It is bound to the west by 16th Street NW, to
the northwest by Alaska Avenue NW, to the north and east by buildings of the former WRAMC,
and to the south by Main Drive. The latter three boundaries (to the north, east, and south) are
within the former WRAMC.
Seven known archaeological sites with prehistoric components are mapped within approximately
2,500 feet of the APE, all within Rock Creek Park. Due to these factors, undisturbed areas were
considered to have a high probability for prehistoric and later archaeological deposits. A Phase
1A archaeological investigation was completed and a Memorandum of Findings submitted
in September 2016 to the DC-HPO. The goal of the Phase 1A investigation was to assess the
potential for the property to contain archaeological resources eligible for listing on the NRHP.
The results of the Phase 1A investigation indicated that soil profiles throughout roughly two-thirds
of the current study area have been graded, cut, or otherwise truncated to such a degree that they
have no potential to contain in-situ cultural material. Intact soils with the potential to contain
cultural material in the upper profile were identified throughout the NW quadrant and across
the central portion of the SW quadrant.
A Phase 1B archaeological study was conducted in the undisturbed NW and SW quadrant areas
where construction or other surface disturbance will or may take place in June 2017. The survey
identified one archaeological site and two isolated finds (ISFs). The ISFs, by definition, are not
eligible for listing in the NRHP. In addition, the archaeological site discovered was recommended
not eligible for the NRHP due to a lack of cultural features, near-surface context of recovered
artifacts, and the existence of an extensive historical record on the Battle of Fort Stevens.
The No Action Alternative would not affect archaeological resources.
The Selected Action Alternative is unlikely to affect archaeological resources based on the
results of the Phase 1B investigation. However, if unanticipated discoveries occur during the
construction phase, DOS will appropriately identify, assess and, if necessary, mitigate adverse

Page xxi

Final Environmental Impact Statement

impacts to the resource. DOS will include language in the lease agreements with foreign missions
to manage unanticipated discoveries in accordance with federal law. Stipulations will be included
in the PA for the treatment and identification of unanticipated discoveries within the APE. DOS
will retain and display the recovered artifacts at the Memorial Chapel on the FMC campus.

Economic Analysis
The No Action Alternative would not impact socioeconomic resources.
The Selected Action Alternative would have a slight positive impact on population and housing.
The Selected Action Alternative would create a positive impact on employment in the regional
economy.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in new employment both from the construction of
the FMC and from operation of future chanceries. The jobs associated with the construction of the
project are a one-time impact and do not represent an ongoing change to regional employment,
while the jobs created from chancery operations represent a permanent impact to the regional
economy. It is expected that the overwhelming majority of direct jobs would be filled by foreign
nationals either relocated from current chancery facilities in Washington, DC or not previously
residing in the country.
Indirect and induced employment would also result from the Selected Action Alternative. Indirect
employment refers to the number of employees who are not employed by the foreign missions,
but are jobs created or supported as a result of increased demand for goods and services as a
result of the FMC’s economic impact. For example, furniture purchased by a chancery would
be considered an indirect impact of the project. Indirect impacts include induced impacts, which
result when the earnings of construction workers and chancery employees, as well as growth
in earnings at suppliers, lead to further sales for businesses that provide consumer goods and
services.
As federal government property leased to foreign missions, chanceries would not generate tax
revenue for the District. However, to the extent that chancery employees support study area
retail businesses or choose to reside within the study area, the FMC would have a slight positive
effect on study area tax revenue.

Security
The WRAMC has been closed to the public since 2001. Under the No Action Alternative, the
property would remain closed to the public and current security measures would continue. Under
the Selected Action Alternative, public access would be maintained along all streets within the
FMC except in limited instances where security justifies the need for temporary closures (such
as national emergencies). DOS will define a process and establish thresholds for security-related
street closures. Programmatic security planning would be developed. It is anticipated that security
measures before, during, and after construction would be different and overlap in some cases.

Page xxii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Security requirements for the individual chanceries would be developed by each chancery and
coordinated with the multijurisdictional authorities, with the ICC used as a security model. The
U.S. Secret Service Uniformed Division is responsible for security of foreign missions and
security requirements would include Secret Service patrols of the area.

Petroleum Tanks and Hazardous Substances
Both the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would represent a decrease in potential
uncontrolled storage tank petroleum releases, as compared to when WRAMC was an operational
Army Garrison, and no significant change from the current conditions.
Under the No Action Alternative, one underground storage tank (UST) and four aboveground
storage tanks (ASTs) would remain at the site of the former WRAMC. The tanks are used to store
diesel fuel to operate electrical generators. These tanks are double-walled and are continuously
monitored for leaks by a leak detection system, except for the auxiliary AST Unknown 2 which
is empty and is disconnected from the primary tank. The tanks would continue to be maintained
in accordance with storage tank and air pollutant regulations.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in the removal of the storage tanks and decommissioning of the generators. If a building will be reused, the foreign mission would be responsible
for removal and decommissioning. If a building is to be demolished, DOS would be responsible
for removal and decommissioning. DOS will be responsible for removal of UST MP-30 that
feeds a generator in Building 54. Through the design guidelines, DOS would ensure that all
remediation is carried out in accordance with district and federal law (Appendix C).
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were historically used in electrical transformers as a dielectric
fluid and coolant at the former WRAMC. There are no known active transformers using PCB
dielectric fluid and coolant. Historically, there were spills of PCB dielectric fluid and coolant
that resulted in contaminated areas both inside the buildings and in outside areas. Several
contaminated areas (PCB-impacted soils, transformer vaults, an interior basement floor, and
transformer pads) remain on the property.
The U.S. Department of the Army (DOA) remediated PCB-impacted soils to meet a low
occupancy area level of cleanup. Based on the available data, the PCB concentrations in some
soils appear to be too high for unrestricted use; therefore, use restrictions need to be kept in
place until either additional investigations and/or remediation are conducted such that it can be
demonstrated the soil PCB concentrations in these areas are appropriate for the planned reuse.
Groundwater was not encountered during excavations of PCB-contaminated soil. Under the No
Action Alternative, the PCB impacted areas would remain in place.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in the removal of PCB-impacted soil and other
materials. If a building will be reused, the foreign mission would be responsible for removal.
If a building is to be demolished, DOS would be responsible for removal. Through the design

Page xxiii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

guidelines, DOS would ensure that all remediation is carried out in accordance with district and
federal law (Appendix C).
Radioactive material was used in Buildings 40, 41, T-2, and the radiological bunker between
Buildings 20 and 40. The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission has released these buildings
for “unrestricted use.”
Based on information provided by the DOA, asbestos is present in Buildings 19, 21, 22, 25, 26,
29, 30, 35, 40, 41, 55, 57, and T-2. The Selected Action Alternative would result in the removal
and disposal of asbestos-containing material from buildings and steam tunnels in accordance
with district and federal law.
Buildings 40, 41, 57, and T-2 are presumed to contain lead-based paint (LBP). The Selected Action
Alternative would require building demolition to occur in accordance with LBP regulations.
Buildings to be reused may require testing and remediation in accordance with the regulations.

AREAS OF CONTROVERSY
Substantial public interest in the proposed action exists; however, no areas of controversy have
been identified. Key issues of concern identified during the scoping process were incorporated
into the development of alternatives and the evaluation criteria used to select the Selected Action
Alternative.

ISSUES TO BE RESOLVED
One issue would be resolved after the circulation of the FEIS: the completion of the process for
complying with the NHPA Section 106. Consulting party meetings were held on February 26,
April 2, May 7, and July 2, 2014; and February 23, and May 4, 2017. As a result of these
meetings, a draft Assessment of Adverse Effects report and an initial outline and draft of a PA
were developed. After further consultation with consulting parties and the public in 2017, these
documents will be revised and finalized. Should archaeological investigations not be concluded
prior to the execution of a PA, stipulations would be included in that document for the treatment
of archaeological resources within the APE.

Page xxiv

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

CONTENTS
Executive Summary..........................................................................................i
Table of Contents......................................................................................... xxv
List of Exhibits............................................................................................xxix
Glossary.....................................................................................................xxxiii
Acronyms........................................................................................................xli
1.0

2.0

Purpose and Need................................................................................. 1
1.1

Overview.................................................................................................1

1.2

Description of the Proposed Action........................................................2

1.3

Purpose and Need...................................................................................8

1.4

Other Actions........................................................................................10

1.5

Federal Decisions and Actions..............................................................12

1.6

Purpose of Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)..............................13

1.7

Scope of Environmental Analysis.........................................................15

1.8

Applicable Regulations, Executive Orders, and Required
Permits and Approvals..........................................................................15

Alternatives Analysis.......................................................................... 23
2.1

Selection of WRAMC as Proposed FMC Site......................................23

2.2

Master Plan Alternatives Identification and Development...................25

2.3

Alternatives Retained for Further Consideration and
Detailed Study.......................................................................................26

2.3.1

No Action Alternative...............................................................26

2.3.2

Alternative 7: Selected Action Alternative...............................27

2.4

Identification of DOS’s Selected Action Alternative............................31

2.5

Alternatives Considered but Eliminated from Detailed Study.............31

2.5.1

Alternative 1..............................................................................32

2.5.2

Alternative 2..............................................................................32

2.5.3

Alternative 3..............................................................................32

2.5.4

Alternative 4..............................................................................33

2.5.5

Alternative 5..............................................................................33

2.5.6

Alternative 6..............................................................................33

Page xxv

Final Environmental Impact Statement

3.0

Affected Environment and Environmental Consequences............. 35
3.1

3.2

3.1.1

Climate......................................................................................38

3.1.2

Soils..........................................................................................38

3.1.3

Geology.....................................................................................39

Water Resources....................................................................................39

3.2.1

Surface Waters..........................................................................39

3.2.2

Groundwater.............................................................................43

3.2.3

Floodplains................................................................................43

3.3

Vegetation.............................................................................................44

3.4

Wildlife.................................................................................................47

3.5

Threatened and Endangered Species and Species of
Conservation Concern...........................................................................47

3.6

Transportation.......................................................................................48

3.7

Page xxvi

Physical Geography..............................................................................38

3.6.1

Vehicle Traffic...........................................................................48

3.6.2

Crash Analysis..........................................................................68

3.6.3

Transit Service..........................................................................69

3.6.4

Pedestrian Facilities..................................................................73

3.6.5

Bicycle Facilities.......................................................................74

Air Quality............................................................................................77

3.7.1

Transportation Conformity.......................................................78

3.7.2

Regional Conformity................................................................79

3.7.3

Mobile Source Air Toxic Analysis............................................79

3.8

Noise.....................................................................................................80

3.9

Land Use, Aesthetics, and Visual Resources........................................88

3.9.1

Land Use and Zoning................................................................88

3.9.2

Visual Resources and Aesthetics...............................................95

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

3.10

Socioeconomics....................................................................................96

3.10.1 Population.................................................................................97
3.10.2 Housing.....................................................................................98
3.10.3 Economic Activity, Employment and Income..........................98
3.10.4 Tax Revenue............................................................................101
3.11

Minority and Disadvantaged Populations...........................................102

3.12

Cultural Resources..............................................................................106

3.12.1 Section 106 Process of the NHPA...........................................107
3.12.2 Historic Resources..................................................................111
3.12.3 Effects to Historic Resources..................................................121
3.12.4 Archaeological Resources.......................................................124
3.12.5 Traditional Cultural Properties................................................128
3.13

Petroleum Tanks and Hazardous Substances......................................128

3.13.1 Petroleum Storage Tanks, Electrical Generators,
and Hydrochloric Acid Storage Tank......................................128
3.13.2 Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs).........................................131
3.13.3 Hazardous Wastes...................................................................134
3.13.4 Radiological Decommissioning..............................................135
3.13.5 Asbestos..................................................................................135
3.13.6 Lead-Based Paint....................................................................136
3.13.7 Disposal Areas........................................................................137
3.14

Energy.................................................................................................137

3.15

Construction Impacts..........................................................................139

3.16

Relationship between the Short-term Use of the
Environment and the Maintenance and Enhancement
of Long-term Productivity..................................................................140

3.17

Irreversible and Irretrievable Commitments of Resources.................141

3.18

Indirect and Cumulative Impacts........................................................141

3.18.1 Indirect Impacts......................................................................141
3.18.2 Cumulative Impacts................................................................142

Page xxvii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

4.0

Coordination and Consultation....................................................... 151
4.1

Scoping...............................................................................................151

4.2

Agency Coordination..........................................................................153

4.3

Consulting Parties...............................................................................161

4.4

Public Involvement.............................................................................162

4.5

Public Information..............................................................................164

4.6

Responses to Substantive Comments.................................................164

5.0

List of Preparers................................................................................ 167

6.0

Distribution List................................................................................ 174

7.0

References.......................................................................................... 180

8.0

Index................................................................................................... 186

APPENDICES
Appendix A: DOA, DC-HPO, and ACHP PA Regarding the Closure and
Transfer of Select Parcels of WRAMC
Appendix B: Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS
Appendix C: FMC Design Guidelines
Appendix D: July 2017 Draft PA Among the DOS, DC-HPO, NCPC, and
ACHP Regarding the Development, Implementation, and
Maintenance of a FMC Within the WRAMC Historic District

Page xxviii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

LIST OF EXHIBITS
Executive Summary
Exhibit S.1 - Study Area................................................................................................ ii
Exhibit S.2 - Selected Action Alternative (Option C).................................................. vii
Exhibit S.3 - Existing Trees.......................................................................................... ix
Exhibit S.4 - Selected Action Alternative Generated Traffic Volumes (2032)............. xii
Exhibit S.5 - Area of Potential Effect for Historic Resources................................... xvii
Exhibit S.6 - Historic Resources............................................................................... xviii

1.0

Purpose and Need

Exhibit 1.1 - Study Area..................................................................................................3
Exhibit 1.2 - Proposed FMC Campus.............................................................................4
Exhibit 1.3 - Zones..........................................................................................................6
Exhibit 1.4 - Building Heights........................................................................................7
Exhibit 1.5 - Lot Density Types......................................................................................8
Exhibit 1.6 - DC-LRA and CNMC Proposed Reuse Plan............................................11
Exhibit 1.7 - EIS Process..............................................................................................14
Exhibit 1.8 - Issues Identification and Tracking...........................................................16
Exhibit 1.9 - Applicable Statutes and Executive Orders...............................................19

2.0

Alternatives Analysis

Exhibit 2.1 - Alternatives Assessment Criteria.............................................................26
Exhibit 2.2 A - Selected Action Alternative..................................................................28
Exhibit 2.2 B - Selected Action Alternative..................................................................29
Exhibit 2.2 C - Selected Action Alternative..................................................................30

3.0

Affected Environment

Exhibit 3.1 - Socioeconomic Study Area......................................................................36
Exhibit 3.2 - Natural Resources Study Area.................................................................37
Exhibit 3.3 - Existing Trees..........................................................................................45
Exhibit 3.4 - Existing Traffic Conditions......................................................................52

Page xxix

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.5 - Other Developments Trip Generation Rate and Projection.....................53
Exhibit 3.6 - No Action Future Traffic Volumes (2032)...............................................54
Exhibit 3.7 - Selected Action Alternative Trip Generation Rate and Projection..........55
Exhibit 3.8 - Selected Action Alternative Generated Traffic Volumes (2032)..............56
Exhibit 3.9 - Selected Action Alternative Future Traffic Volumes (2032)....................58
Exhibit 3.10 - Peak Traffic Delays (in seconds)...........................................................59
Exhibit 3.11 - Road Capacity and Mitigation Measures under the
Selected Action Alternative....................................................................62
Exhibit 3.12 - Car Sharing............................................................................................68
Exhibit 3.13 - Intersection Crash Rates........................................................................69
Exhibit 3.14 - Existing Transit Routes, Stations, and Stops.........................................70
Exhibit 3.15 - Existing and Proposed Bicycle Facilities...............................................76
Exhibit 3.16 - National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Washington, DC..............78
Exhibit 3.17 - Noise Level Comparisons......................................................................80
Exhibit 3.18 - Hourly Weighted Sound Levels dB(A) for Various
Land Use Activity Categories.................................................................81
Exhibit 3.19 - Noise Measurement and Analysis Sites.................................................82
Exhibit 3.20 - Validation Results..................................................................................84
Exhibit 3.20 - Validation Results (Continued)..............................................................85
Exhibit 3.21 - Summary of Modeled Noise Levels at Measurement
Sites and Receptors................................................................................86
Exhibit 3.22 - Existing Land Use..................................................................................89
Exhibit 3.23 - Zoning....................................................................................................90
Exhibit 3.24 - Community Facilities.............................................................................94
Exhibit 3.25 - Population Change 2000-2014...............................................................97
Exhibit 3.26 - Population Projections...........................................................................97
Exhibit 3.27 - Housing Characteristics, 2014...............................................................98
Exhibit 3.28 - Housing Units by Structure....................................................................98
Exhibit 3.29 - Median Length of Time in Home (years)..............................................98
Exhibit 3.30 - Labor Force Trends, 2000-2014.............................................................99
Exhibit 3.31 - Employment and Unemployment, 2000-2014.......................................99

Page xxx

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.33 - Employment Projections......................................................................100
Exhibit 3.32 - Major Private Employers within the District of Columbia..................100
Exhibit 3.34 - Study Area Median Household Income, 1999-2014............................101
Exhibit 3.35 - EJ Statistics of Comparable Geographic Units....................................103
Exhibit 3.36 - Percent Minority and Percent Low Income by Block Group..............104
Exhibit 3.37 - Limited English-Speaking Households by Block Group.....................105
Exhibit 3.38 - Area of Potential Effect for Historic Resources...................................112
Exhibit 3.39 - Historic Resources...............................................................................113
Exhibit 3.40 - Intact Soils with Potential to Contain Archaeological Resources........126
Exhibit 3.41 - Summary of Former Storage Tanks.....................................................129
Exhibit 3.42 - Petroleum Tanks and Hazardous Substances.......................................130
Exhibit 3.43 - Approximate Distances of Indirect Effect Zones.................................142
Exhibit 3.44 - Cumulative Effects Study Area............................................................144
Exhibit 3.45 - DC-LRA Proposed Land Use and Phasing..........................................146
Exhibit 3.46 - Regional Emissions Inventory 2013....................................................148

4.0

Coordination and Consultation

Exhibit 4.1 - Summary of Scoping Letters.................................................................152
Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings..............................................................154

Page xxxi

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page xxxii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

GLOSSARY
Affected Environment – The physical features and land area(s) to be influenced or impacted by a
proposed action under consideration. This term can also refer to various social and environmental
factors and conditions pertinent to an area.
Agency Coordination – A general term referring to the process whereby government agencies
are afforded an opportunity to review and comment on a proposed action.
Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT) – The total yearly volume in both directions of travel
divided by the number of days in the year.
Archaeological Sites – Places in which past peoples left physical evidence of their occupation.
Archaeological sites may include ruins and foundations of historic-era buildings and structures, or
surface ruins and/or underground deposits of Native American occupation debris such as artifacts,
food remains (shells and bones), and former dwelling structures. Important archaeological sites
can qualify as “historic properties.”
Attainment Area – A geographic area in which levels of a criteria air pollutant meet the
health-based primary standard (i.e., National Ambient Air Quality Standard) for the pollutant.
Attainment areas are defined using federal pollutant limits set by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) – The total volume of vehicle travel during a given time period
(in whole days), greater than one day and less than one year, divided by the number of days in
that time period.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) – Techniques and measures employed during and after
construction to treat surface runoff and protect receiving water quality.
Chancery – The principal offices and annexes (including ancillary offices and support facilities)
of a foreign mission used for diplomatic or related purposes; includes the site and any buildings
on the site which are used for such purposes.
Comment Period – The duration of time during which written comments or responses may
be submitted to an agency that has distributed a document for review and comment. It can be
applicable to all types of documents that are circulated as well as to formal presentations, such
as those that may be given by officials at a public hearing.
Conceptual Mitigation – The early, generalized identification of design, operational, construction,
or other measures considered to avoid, minimize, or compensate for anticipated environmental
consequences. Typically, conceptual mitigation represents ideas discussed before the concluding
stages of an environmental study.

Page xxxiii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) Regulations – Directives issued by the Federal
Council on Environmental Quality, published in 40 CFR 1500-1508, which governs the
implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the development and
issuance of environmental policy and procedure for federal actions by public agencies. The
regulations contain definitions, spell out applicability and responsibilities, and mandate certain
processes and procedures for state agencies with programs that use federal aid funds.
Criteria Pollutants – Six pollutants for which the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has
established national ambient air quality standards to protect human health, as required by the
1970 amendments to the Clean Air Act. These pollutants include ozone, carbon monoxide, total
suspended particulates, sulfur dioxide, lead, and nitrogen oxide.
Cultural Resources – Historic properties, archaeological sites, Native American cultural
resources, cultural institutions, ways of life, culturally valued viewsheds, places of cultural
association, and other valued places and social institutions.
Cumulative Impacts – Impacts on the environment that result from the incremental impact of
a project when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless
of which agency or person undertakes other such actions.
Daily Traffic Volume – The number of vehicles that use a given roadway in both directions
during a 24-hour period.
dB – Decibel, a unit of measurement of sound level which expresses relative difference in power
or intensity, usually between two acoustic or electric signals, equal to 10 times the common
logarithm of the ratio of the two levels.
dBA – An abbreviation for A-weighted decibel. A decibel is a unit used to describe sound-pressure
levels on a logarithmic scale. For a community noise-impact assessment, an A-weighted frequency
filter is used to approximate the way humans hear sound.
Deciduous – Refers to woody vegetation, such as oak or maple trees, that shed their leaves after
the growing season.
Direct Impacts – The immediate effects on the social, economic, and physical environment
caused by the construction and operation of a proposed action. These impacts are usually
experienced within the immediate vicinity of the proposed action.
Disadvantaged Population – A group of people, living in one area, that has a median income
below the federal poverty level or that exhibits other indicators of economic disadvantage.
Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) – The document prepared by a federal agency
in accordance with National Environmental Policy Act regulations (22 CFR Part 161). These
regulations require that the DEIS evaluate all reasonable alternatives considered; discuss the

Page xxxiv

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

reasons that alternatives have been eliminated from detailed study; and summarize the studies,
reviews, consultations, and coordination required by environmental laws and Executive Orders.
Endangered Species – According to the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, endangered
species are any species in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its
natural range or territory.
Environment – The complex of social, natural, and cultural conditions that are present in the
physical surroundings.
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) – A document prepared by a federal agency when
undertaking a “major Federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.”
An EIS is to serve as an action-forcing device to ensure that the policies and goals defined in
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) are infused into the ongoing programs and
actions of the Federal Government. Agencies shall focus on significant environmental issues
and alternatives and shall reduce paperwork and the accumulation of extraneous background
data, per 40 CFR Section 1502.1.
Environmental Feature – A general term to denote resources or objects. Features may include
natural or physical resources, important structures, community facilities, topographic features,
and certain other land uses.
Environmental Justice – The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless
of race, color, national origin, or income with respect to the development and implementation
of federal actions in accordance with applicable environmental laws, regulations, and policies.
Fair treatment means that no group of people, including racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic group
should bear a disproportionate share of the negative environmental consequences resulting from
industrial, municipal, and commercial operations or the execution of federal, state, local, and
tribal programs and policies.
Federal Register – A daily publication of the U.S. Government Printing Office that contains
notices, announcements, rulemaking, and other official pronouncements of the administrative
agencies of the U.S. Government. Various announcements and findings related to specific
environmental matters and proposed actions and activities appear in this publication.
Final Environmental Impact Statement (FEIS) – The document prepared after circulation
of a DEIS (or Supplemental DEIS) and consideration of comments received. The National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) regulations (22 CFR Part 161) requires that the FEIS identify
a Selected Alternative, evaluate all reasonable alternatives considered, discuss and respond to
substantive comments on the DEIS, summarize public involvement, and describe the mitigation
measures that will be incorporated into the proposed action.
Floodplain – The level area adjoining a river channel that is inundated during periods of high
water flow.

Page xxxv

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Foreign Mission – Any mission to or agency or entity in the United States which is involved
in the diplomatic, consular, or other activities of, or which is substantially owned or effectively
controlled by a foreign government; or an organization representing a territory or political entity
which has been granted diplomatic or other official privileges and immunities under the laws
of the United States or which engages in some aspect of the conduct of international affairs of
such territory or political entity, including any real property of such a mission and including the
personnel of such a mission.
Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) – A gas that absorbs infrared radiation in the atmosphere. Greenhouse
gases include carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, chlorofluorocarbons, hydrochlorofluorocarbons, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride.
Hazardous Substance – Byproducts of society that can pose a substantial or potential hazard to
human health or the environment when improperly managed. A hazardous substance possesses
at least one of four characteristics (ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity) or appears on
special lists prepared by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency available in the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 261.
Heritage Trees – In 2016, the District of Columbia passed zoning act 31-386, which defines a
tree that is 100 inches or greater in circumference as a Heritage Tree. Heritage Trees may not
be removed unless the tree is in poor condition or the tree is an invasive species as identified by
the Urban Forestry Administration.
Historic Properties – Places that are eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places, or local landmarks. These properties can include districts, sites, buildings, structures,
objects, and landscapes significant in American history, prehistory, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, and culture. Historic properties can also include traditional cultural properties.
Hourly Traffic Volume – The number of vehicles that use a given road during a one-hour period.
Indirect Effects (or secondary impacts) – Effects caused by a given action occurring later in
time or farther removed in distance but that are reasonably foreseeable (e.g., induced changes
to land-use patterns, population density, and growth rate).
Lead Agency – The federal project proponent with primary responsibility for preparing an
environmental document.
Level of Detail – A general term referring to the amount of data collected and the scale, scope,
extent, and degree to which item-by-item particulars and refinements of specific points are
necessary or desirable in carrying out a study. Level of detail is an important factor in the quality
of a study, overall study costs, and length of time needed to perform study work.
Mesoscale Air Quality Analysis – A regional-level analysis of air for chemical constituents.

Page xxxvi

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Microscale Air Quality Analysis – An analysis of air for chemical constituents, typically
conducted for a small study area such as an intersection.
Mitigation – Actions that avoid, minimize, or compensate for potential adverse impacts. In
accordance with CEQ Regulations, mitigation includes avoidance, minimization, rectification,
reduction, and compensation.
Mitigation Measures – Specific design, commitment, or compensation made during the
environmental evaluation and study process that serve to moderate or lessen impacts from
a proposed action. In accordance with CEQ Regulations, mitigation includes avoidance,
minimization, rectification, reduction, and compensation.
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) – The prescribed level of pollutants in
the outside air that cannot be exceeded during a specified time in a specified geographic area.
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) – The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
(NEPA) was enacted to ensure that information on the environmental impacts of any Federal
or federally funded action is available to public officials and citizens before decisions are made
and before actions are taken.
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) – The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
(NHPA) is the core legislation regarding the preservation of historic and cultural properties in
the United States. The NHPA created many familiar components of preservation in the United
States, such as the National Register of Historic Places, State Historic Preservation Officers/
Offices (SHPOs), and federal stewardship programs regarding federally owned or managed
historic properties.
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) – A list of structures, sites, and districts of national
historical significance as determined by the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation under
the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended.
No Action Alternative – The no action alternative is the baseline to which all other alternatives
are compared; it demonstrates the consequences of taking no action.
Noise Abatement Measures – Actions that reduce noise impacts. Noise abatement measures can
be management measures, alteration of horizontal and vertical alignments, acquisition of property
rights for construction of noise barriers, construction of noise barriers, acquisition of real property
or interest for buffer zones, or noise insulation of public-use or nonprofit institutional structures.
Peak Hour – The hour of the day when traffic volume on a given roadway is highest. A separate
peak hour can be defined for morning and evening periods.
Peak-hour Leq (equivalent sound level) – Represents the noisiest hour of the day/night and
usually occurs during peak periods of motor-vehicle traffic. The Leq is the equivalent sound-level

Pagexxxvii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

measurement, which means it averages background and short-term transient sound levels and
provides a uniform method for comparing sound levels that vary over time.
Public Hearing – A meeting designed to afford the public the fullest opportunity to express
opinions on a proposed action. A verbatim record (i.e., transcript) of the proceedings is made
part of the project record.
Public Involvement – Activities that present information to the public, seek public comments,
and serve to ensure consideration of public opinion.
Public Meeting – A meeting designed to facilitate participation in the decision-making process
and to assist the public in gaining an informed view of a proposed action. Such a gathering may
be referred to as a public information meeting.
Record of Decision (ROD) – The document that presents the basis for the federal agency action
and summarizes any mitigation measures to be incorporated into the proposed action. No federal
agency action may be undertaken until a ROD has been signed. A ROD is prepared no sooner
than 30 days after the public release of the Final EIS (FEIS).
Scoping – Part of the NEPA process in which the scope of issues and alternatives for a proposed
action are determined by consulting with stakeholders—federal agencies, state agencies, tribes,
cities and towns, and the public.
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act – The National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 470f), Section 106, requires federal agencies to consider the effect of
their undertakings on properties included in or eligible for inclusion on the National Register
of Historic Places and to afford the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation the opportunity
to comment on such undertakings.
Section 404 – The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 U.S.C. 401 et
seq.) is the enabling legislation for protection of waters of the United States by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Significant Impacts – Any number of social, environmental, or economic effects or influences
that may occur as a result of the implementation of a proposed action. “Significant impacts”
may include effects that are direct, secondary, or cumulative. The term significant is used to
measure both context and intensity in determining what type of National Environmental Policy
Act document is appropriate.
Special Trees – The Urban Forest Preservation Act of 2002 identified trees with a circumference
of 55 inches or more as Special Trees. Special Trees cannot be cut down, topped, or destroyed
without a permit issued by the mayor's office and mitigated using one of two options: 1)
replacement trees based on a formula defined in the Urban Forest Preservation Act, or 2) monetary
payment to the Tree Fund of $35 per inch of circumference.

Pagexxxviii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

State Historic Preservation Office – State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPOs) administer
the national historic preservation program at the state level, review National Register of Historic
Places nominations, maintain data on historic properties that have been identified but not yet
nominated, and consult with federal agencies during Section 106 review. SHPOs are designated
by the governor/mayor of their respective state or territory.
Study Area – An identified expanse of land or topography selected and defined at the outset of
engineering or environmental evaluations that is sufficiently adequate in size to fully identify,
analyze, and document impacts and effects for proposed actions within its boundaries.
Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement (SDEIS) – A document prepared by a
federal agency when it is determined that after the publication, of a DEIS or FEIS; 1) Changes
to the proposed action would result in significant environmental impacts that were not evaluated
in the EIS; or 2) New information or circumstances relevant to environmental concerns and
bearing on the proposed action or its impacts would result in significant environmental impacts
not evaluated in the EIS.
Threatened Species – A species which is likely to become an endangered species within the
foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range or territory.
Undertaking – An undertaking is a federal project, activity, or program, including those carried
out by or on behalf of a federal agency; those carried out with federal financial assistance; or
those requiring a federal permit, license, or approval.
U.S. Department of State – the United States federal executive department responsible for
international relations of the United States, equivalent to the foreign ministries of other countries.
The department was created in 1789 and was the first executive department established.
Waters of the U.S. – Waters used in interstate or foreign commerce, subject to ebb and flow of
the tide, and all interstate waters including interstate wetlands which are considered jurisdictional
under Section 328.3[2] of the Clean Water Act. Jurisdictional waters of the U.S. are further defined
as all other waters such as navigable waterways, intrastate lakes, rivers, streams, intermittent
streams, mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes,
natural ponds or impoundments of water, tributaries of waters, and territorial seas.
Wetlands – Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, under normal conditions, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, and similar areas.

Page xxxix

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page xl

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

ACRONYMS
ACHP Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
ACM Asbestos-Containing Material
AFIP Armed Forces Institute of Pathology
AFRH Armed Forces Retirement Home
ANC Advisory Neighborhood Commission
APCWDW The Alliance to Preserve The Civil War Defenses of Washington
APE Area of Potential Effects
AST Aboveground Storage Tank
BMP Best Management Practice
BRAC Base Realignment and Closure Act
BZA Board of Zoning Adjustment
CAA Clean Air Act
CEQ Council on Environmental Quality
CFA U.S. Commission of Fine Arts
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CLRP Constrained Long Range Plan
CNMC Children's National Medical Center
CO Carbon Monoxide
CO2 Carbon Dioxide
CO2e Carbon Dioxide Equivalents
dB Decibel
dB(A) A-weighted Decibel
dbh Diameter at Breast Height
DC-HPO District of Columbia Historic Preservation Office
DC-LRA

District of Columbia’s Walter Reed Army Medical Center Local
Redevelopment Authority

DDOE District of Columbia Department of the Environment
DDOT District of Columbia Department of Transportation
DEIS Draft Environmental Impact Statement
DMPED Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development
DOA The U.S. Department of the Army
DOS The U.S. Department of State
ECP Environmental Condition of Property

Page xli

Final Environmental Impact Statement

ACRONYMS (CONTINUED)
EIS Environmental Impact Statement
EJ Environmental Justice
EO Executive Order
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
ESA Endangered Species Act
FEIS Final Environmental Impact Statement
FHWA Federal Highway Administration
FMA The Foreign Missions Act of 1982
FMC Foreign Missions Center
GHGs Greenhouse Gases
GSA General Services Administration
ICC International Chancery Center
LBP Lead-Based Paint
LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LEP Limited English Proficiency
Leq Hourly Equivalent Noise Levels
LOS Level of Service
LPI Leading Pedestrian Interval
MOA Memorandum of Agreement
MSAT Mobile Source Air Toxics
MWCOG Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments
NAAQS National Ambient Air Quality Standards
NCPC National Capital Planning Commission
NEPA National Environmental Policy Act
NHPA National Historic Preservation Act
NO2 Nitrous Oxide
NPS National Park Service
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
O3 Ozone
OFM Office of Foreign Missions
PA Programmatic Agreement
PCB Polychlorinated Biphenyls
PM2.5 Particulate Matter less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter

Page xlii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

ACRONYMS (CONTINUED)
PM10 Particulate Matter less than 10 micrometers in aerodynamic diameter
PPM Parts Per Million
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
ROD Record of Decision
ROW Right-of-Way
SDEIS Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office
SIP State Implementation Plan
SO2 Sulphur Dioxide
SWDC Special Waters of the District of Columbia
TDM Trasportation Demand Management
TIP Transportation Improvement Plan
TMDL Total Maximum Daily Load
TMP Transportation Management Plan
TNM Traffic Noise Model
USFWS U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
UST Underground Storage Tank
VMT Vehicle Miles Traveled
WMATA Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority
WRAIR Walter Reed Institute of Research
WRAMC Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page xliii

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page xliv

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

1.0 PURPOSE AND NEED
1.1

OVERVIEW

The Department of State (DOS) is the federal executive agency
responsible for the international relations of the United States.
DOS has a number of domestic and international responsibilities
associated with the establishment and operation of foreign
missions in the United States. In this regard, DOS is responsible
for assisting foreign missions with identifying properties on which
they may locate and operate chanceries in the United States.
Due to the ever-increasing scarcity of suitable properties
within the District of Columbia, combined with DOS’s need
for properties in foreign nations of considerable size, the
establishment of a new chancery enclave is central to the
achievement of a number of goals:

Chapter 1 details the underlying purpose
and needs to which the projects sponsors
are responding with alternatives in
Chapter 2. Chapter 1 provides an
overview of the decision makers and
decision-making process and provides
a foundation for the remainder of the
document.

A “chancery” is the principal offices of
a foreign mission used for diplomatic or
related purposes, and annexes to such
offices (including ancillary offices and
support facilities), and includes the site
and any buildings on the site which are
used for such purposes.

◊

Protecting Americans: Several thousand U.S.
government employees work at facilities that need
to be replaced in nations where site acquisitions are
complicated by the lack of reciprocal parcels within the
District of Columbia. This project would allow DOS to
leverage the availability of “chancery ready” parcels to
speed and/or finalize the acquisition of safe and secure
facilities from which to conduct American diplomatic
and consular operations.

◊

Growing the American Economy: Research proves that
one U.S. job is created by every 65 tourist visas issued
from a U.S. embassy or consular post abroad. The DOS
can leverage this project to speed the acquisition of new
locations in select countries where visa demand is strong
and expected to grow, yet current building constraints
inhibit DOS’s ability to address this demand efficiently.

◊

Location of foreign Chanceries in New Areas of the District of Columbia: The majority
of the foreign missions in the District of Columbia are heavily concentrated along
Massachusetts Avenue, and the Sheridan-Kalorama neighborhood. This project would
expand desirable chancery locations further into the District to generate economic benefits
for the city and enhance both existing and proposed developments.

A “foreign mission” is any mission
to or agency or entity in the United
States which is involved in diplomatic,
consular or other activities of, or which
is substantially owned or effectively
controlled by, a foreign government; or
an organization representing a territory
or political entity which has been granted
diplomatic or other official privileges
and immunities under the laws of the
United States or which engages in some
aspect of the conduct of international
affairs of such territory or political
entity, including any real property of
such a mission and the personnel of
such a mission.

The availability of adequate space for the construction and operation of chanceries by foreign
missions has been a long-standing challenge in the District of Columbia. An initial response to this
issue came with the passage of the International Chancery Act of 1968, which authorized DOS to
undertake the redevelopment of the former campus of the National Bureau of Standards, located

Page 1

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Foreign Missions Act of 1982 (FMA)
The Foreign Missions Act of 1982,
22 U.S.C. 4301-4316, reaffirms the
federal government’s jurisdiction
over the operation of foreign missions
and international organizations in
the United States. The act resulted
in the establishment of the Office
of Foreign Missions (OFM) within
DOS to review and control the
operations of foreign missions in the
United States and the benefits that are
made available to them. It empowers
OFM to set the terms and conditions
whereby benefits may be provided
to foreign missions. It establishes
procedures and criteria governing the
location, replacement, or expansion
of chanceries in Washington, DC.
The act authorizes DOS to acquire
property in the United States for the
establishment of property exchange
agreements with foreign governments,
whereby the U.S. government would
reciprocally obtain a site abroad that
is of equal benefit.

near the intersection of Connecticut Avenue and Van Ness Street, as
the International Chancery Center (ICC); the ICC started construction
in 1968. All parcels within the ICC are fully assigned. In anticipation
of needing another site similar to the ICC, DOS undertook a multiyear
evaluation of available land parcels within the District of Columbia
and concluded that the former Walter Reed Army Medical Center
(WRAMC) site was best suited to support a chancery center concept.

1.2 DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED
ACTION
The proposed action is to prepare a master plan for the long-term
development of a Foreign Missions Center (FMC) on approximately
31.7 acres of the former WRAMC site at 16th Street, between Aspen
Street and Alaska Avenue in the District of Columbia (Exhibit 1.1).
The proposed action consists of assignment of federal land to foreign
missions for the purpose of constructing and operating new chancery
facilities (Exhibit 1.2). DOS would manage the FMC, including
maintaining common areas. In support of the master plan, design
guidelines have been developed to assist foreign missions with the
development of their lot (Appendix C). Each foreign mission design
would be subject to the local jurisdictional approval process for the
design and construction of mission facilities.

The proposed FMC was conceptually planned to complement the
campus character and be consistent with current and future adjacent land uses by:
1. Designing each lot access point to be placed on internal roadways of the campus;
2. Allowing public access (pedestrian, bicycle, motorized vehicle) to the proposed streets
and 14th Street parkway within the site;
3. Developing a reuse program for one historic building and maximizing the potential for
reuse of other historic buildings;
4. Maintaining a greater than 30-foot setback between the southern boundary of the
site and historic Main Drive (including a 15-foot transportation easement, 15-foot
DOS easement, and additional setback from these two easements as described in lot
development guidelines);
5. Emphasizing vehicular and pedestrian connections between the DOS portion and the
adjacent land uses; and

Page 2

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1.1 - Study Area
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary

FERN STREET

DAHLIA STREET

MAIN DRIVE

13TH STREET

LU
ZO
N

AV
E

NU

E

ASPEN STREET
14TH STREET

Rock Creek
Park

16TH STREET

AL

GEORGIA AVEN
UE

AS

KA

AV
E

NU

E

14TH STREET

13TH STREET

Study Area Boundary

N

0’

400’

800’

Page 3

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 1.2 - Proposed FMC Campus
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Open Green Space
Trees
Potentially Reusable Buildings
Existing Building to Remain

N

Not to Scale

Page 4

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

6. Maintaining a 50-foot vegetated buffer on the west boundary of the site, and preserving
the tree canopy to the extent possible.
DOS anticipates a maximum of 15 chanceries to be established at the FMC. Countries would
have the option to combine lots if desired. The lots would range in size. The lots south of Dahlia
Street are envisioned to be larger with the expectation that foreign missions may construct several
buildings, creating a compound (Exhibit 1.3). The lots along and north of Dahlia Street are
envisioned to be closer together, resulting in a denser development. Each foreign mission would
be responsible for meeting parking needs (employee and visitor) on its individual lot. The design
guidelines will require a majority of parking to be below grade (Appendix C). On-street parking
on internal FMC roadways would not be permitted. Specific lot development guidelines (such as
minimal building setbacks, building lot coverage, maximum building height, and floor-to-area
ratio) would be dependent upon the lot’s location (exhibits 1.4 and 1.5).
The primary vehicle entrance would be at the intersection of Main Drive and 14th Street. Other
vehicle entrances would be at Alaska Avenue and Dahlia Street and Dahlia Street. Streets internal
to the FMC would be private, and owned and maintained by the federal government. Primary
streets (14th Street and Dahlia Street) would consist of one travel lane and one bike lane in each
direction. Wider sidewalks would be located on both sides of primary streets. Intersections would
be controlled with stop signs. The FMC would be open to public transit.
The existing historic perimeter fence along the 16th Street and Alaska Avenue frontages would be
retained. Each foreign mission would be responsible for the perimeter security of its individual
lot. The design guidelines state that the maximum height for private frontage fences on individual
lots shall be no greater than three meters above the finish grade of the sidewalk (Appendix C).
Private frontage fences are required to be open and finished with a dark color. Low walls not higher
than 0.8 meter above the sidewalk finish grade may be included in the overall height of the fence.
Utilities at the FMC would include domestic water, stormwater drainage and treatment, sanitary
sewerage, data and telecommunications, electrical power, natural gas, and street lighting.
Stormwater would be managed at the FMC as a whole and on-site at each lot, including
opportunities for gray water reuse and bioretention gardens. The stormwater system for roads
would connect to the District of Columbia system. Utilities would be underground within the
street/sidewalk right-of-way (ROW). Utility service would be provided to each lot.
Foreign missions would fully fund DOS’s upfront infrastructure development costs through the
revenue generated from the assignment of lots. Cost effectiveness measures for the FMC include
maximizing the number of lots available for assignment, reusing existing roadway locations,
and minimizing maintenance-intensive public features. The foreign missions would develop
their individual lots over approximately 15-20 years.

Page 5

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 1.3 - Zones

N

0’

Page 6

200’

400’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1.4 - Building Heights
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
25’ - 40’ (2-3 Stories)
30’ - 50’ (3-4 Stories)
Green Space

N

0’

200’

400’

Page 7

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 1.5 - Lot Density Types
Lot Type

Chapel Zone

Dahlia Street
Zone

Main Drive
Zone

1.3

Lot Size

0.9 to 1.7
acres

1.6 to 2.9
acres

2.1 to 4.9
acres

Floor Area
Ratio

0.75
(chapel itself
is 0.17)

0.6 to 1.2

0.6 to 1.2

Front
yard
setback

Side yard
setback

10 to 20 ft.

15 to 40 ft.

10 ft.

10 to 20 ft.

20 to 50 ft.

20 ft.

Building
coverage and
height

Up to 25%
coverage, 1 to 3
stories

20% to 30%
coverage, 2 to 4
stories

15% to 30%
coverage, 3 to 4
stories

Description
•

Low to medium density
buildings

•

Shallow setbacks with dense
tree coverage

•

Deep vegetative buffer at
Alaska Avenue

•

Buildings oriented to street
defining a street wall

•

Medium density buildings
forming a uniform street
wall

•

Shallow setbacks with some
tree coverage

•

Steep slopes west of 14th
Street, greater density of
development east of 14th
Street

•

Legacy placemaking (axial
relationships and open
space)

•

Single or multiple buildings
on landscaped open area

•

Preservation of elements
and features of natural
landscape

•

Deep setbacks preserving
tree coverage along 16th
Street and the ellipse on
Main Drive

PURPOSE AND NEED

The purpose of the proposed action is to prepare a master plan for the long-term development
of a FMC, under authorities of the FMA, on the site of the former WRAMC in the District
of Columbia. The master plan is intended to guide the development of a cohesive campus by
establishing design and land-use planning principles for the construction of new buildings,
roadways, open green space, and utilities, while minimizing environmental impacts.
The need for the proposed action is based on increased and high demand for foreign mission
facilities in the District of Columbia, a lack of large sites for foreign mission development or
redevelopment in the District, and the need for land to use in property exchanges with other
countries. The proposed action is needed primarily to address the increasing scarcity of suitable
properties within the District to locate the operations of foreign missions. This scarcity has
impacted DOS’s ability to acquire properties in foreign nations.

Page 8

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Increased and High Demand for Foreign Mission Facilities in the
District of Columbia
DOS has an urgent need to meet the demand from foreign missions for modern and secure
facilities within the nation’s capital. The District of Columbia is one of the smallest national
capitals, but is home to more foreign missions than any other city in the world. There are
approximately186 foreign missions and 31 headquarters or offices of international organizations
in the northwest quadrant of the city, heavily concentrated along Massachusetts Avenue, the
Sheridan-Kalorama neighborhood, and at the full ICC.
The collapses in the 1990s of both the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia resulted in the creation of
21 new countries, all of which quickly moved to establish diplomatic missions in the District
of Columbia. Many are located in small, historic townhouses in the Sheridan-Kalorama and
Massachusetts Avenue areas. Two decades later, many of these countries have outgrown the
small facilities acquired in the very early days of their histories. Further, the rapid growth and
prominence in the past decade of countries such as Brazil, China, India, and Vietnam have
had a significant impact on the diplomatic presence of such governments, as well as on DOS’s
reciprocal presence and operations in those countries.

Lack of Property for Development or Redevelopment of Foreign
Mission Facilities in the District of Columbia
There is a lack of property within the District of Columbia for the development or redevelopment
of foreign missions facilities. The FMA states that chanceries shall be able to locate, as a
matter of right, in an area which is zoned commercial, industrial, waterfront or mixed use.
Properties that fail to meet these criteria require the consent of the District of Columbia’s Board
of Zoning Adjustment (BZA). The BZA is required by Congress to make its decision based upon
several factors, including: 1) historic preservation, 2) adequacy of off-street or other parking
and the extent to which the area would be served by public transportation, and 3) the extent to
which the area is capable of being adequately protected, as determined by DOS. Due to these
zoning requirements and the limited supply of undeveloped or redevelopable parcels within the
District of Columbia, the ability of foreign missions to identify appropriate sites is becoming
incrementally more challenging each year.
The ICC successfully allowed foreign missions to locate their chanceries in a purpose-built
community, which was designed to both address the modern needs of such operations and
to mitigate possible negative impacts such facilities may have, or be perceived to have, to
neighboring properties and citizens. The ICC has proven to be a highly successful model for
balancing the federal government’s need to accommodate foreign mission facilities with the
concerns of citizens about the location and operation of foreign missions in the District of
Columbia. With the ICC fully assigned, DOS has a need to create a second ICC-type location.

Page 9

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Reciprocity Difficulties
In accordance with the FMA, DOS enters into property exchange agreements with other countries,
whereby property is provided to foreign governments for the establishment of missions in
exchange for DOS receiving similar property within their countries. In addition to the FMA, the
1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations mandates that signatory nations, including the
United States, must facilitate the acquisition of premises for foreign missions (Article 21). These
premises must “accord full facilities for the performance of the functions of the mission (Article
25).” Further, signatory nations must provide secure facilities by taking “all appropriate steps
to protect the premises of the mission (Article 22).” The lack of suitable land for development
or redevelopment and a full ICC have inhibited DOS’s ability to reciprocally acquire property
abroad to house its diplomatic and consular facilities.
The construction of the new U.S. chancery in Beijing and the Chinese chancery in the District of
Columbia provides an example of how reciprocity functions. During the 1990s, U.S. chancery
facilities in Beijing were identified as not meeting functional, safety, or security standards. With
buildings on three distinct compounds and embassy offices located at 20 sites around Beijing, there
was a need to co-locate personnel onto a single compound. In addition, the demand for consular
services in Beijing was increasing. After initiating planning with the Chinese government, the new
U.S. chancery in Beijing was constructed, and opened in August 2008 on a 10-acre site in China’s
Third Diplomatic Enclave. Simultaneously, DOS was able to provide China with land in the ICC
for their new chancery, which also opened in 2008. Planning and construction of the U.S. and
Chinese chanceries was governed by a series of reciprocal agreements and memoranda between the
two countries. Without the ability to accommodate China’s construction needs at the ICC, DOS’s
efforts to construct a new U.S. chancery in Beijing would most likely not have been successful.
As foreign governments continue to face greater difficulty identifying properties within the District
of Columbia that are either available for chancery use or are viewed by foreign governments as
being suitable for modern operations, DOS faces a number of new challenges in its attempts to
reciprocally acquire properties in other countries. DOS has a need to resolve stalled attempts to
acquire property in certain countries to construct adequate and secure facilities for the conduct
of American diplomacy and consular operations.

1.4

OTHER ACTIONS

The Department of the Army is dividing the former WRAMC into three proposed developments.
About 31.7 acres of the westerly portion of the campus would be developed by DOS for the FMC.
In the central portion of the campus, 11.9 acres would be dedicated to the Children’s National
Medical Center (CNMC) through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for a medical
research facility (Exhibit 1.6). CNMC plans to reuse existing Building 54 (Research Lab), Building
53 (Lecture Hall), Building 52 (Clinic), and Building 3 (Parking Garage) for their original purposes.
The CNMC expects to employ 450 workers for the next three to five years, and 550-600 workers
at full capacity. Work hours are expected to be 8:30-5:30, with some evening work. Maximum
expected daily outpatients will be 50. CNMC employees will access the facility via Dahlia Street
from Alaska Avenue and Georgia Avenue; 13th Place to Fern Street will remain closed.

Page 10

Exhibit 1.6 - DC-LRA and CNMC Proposed Reuse Plan

Legend

Legend
PROPOSED LAND USE PLAN

PROPOS

Residential
12TH ST. N.W.

Institutional / Corporate

Open Space (~9 acres)

L

Mixed-use Open Space (~5 acres)

P

Existing Building

DAHLIA ST. N.W.

12

A

B

C

D

E

F

Research
Lab

AV
E

Phase 1B (2014 - 2017)

G

O

H

KA

Phase 2 (2018 - 2022)
Phase 3 (2023 - 2027)

K

Lecture
Hall
Clinic

Phase 4 (2028 - 2032)
Future Growth Area

I

J

L
P

Other Development

DAHLIA ST. N.W.

Children’s National Medical Center

M

N

1

Q

R

7

M

AI

N

.
. N.W
DR

6

S

14 N

E. N.W.

ASPEN ST.

GEORGIA AV

U

PHASING

12

17

Z

X

W
DR

NW

W

15

.

82

E. CA
M

A

11

14 S

RON
DR

90

U

V

ASPEN ST.

13TH PL. N.W.

14TH ST. N.W.

18

16

ASPEN ST. N.W.

Source: Adapted from DC-LRA Small Area Draft Plan, Perkins+Will

9

ERON

C
W.

ME

Y

8

T

.N

14

13TH ST. N.W.

ASPEN ST. N.W.

18

AS

V

9

Parking
Garage

AL

90

Phase 1A-NOI (2013 - 2014)
8

FERN ST. N.W.

ELDER ST. N.W.

PHASING PLAN

16TH ST. N.W.

E. CA

82

MERO
N

DR

.N

W

T

LRA Boundary

AV
E.
N.
W
.

S

Planned Streetcar

N

6

Historic Building Reuse

W
.

R

7

GEORGIA AVE
. N.W.

Q

N.

N

ZO

I

J

12TH ST. N.W.

Mixed-use Creative
Public Facility

O

13TH ST. N.W.

Educational

G

LU

C
F

14TH PL. N.W.

B
E
ELDER ST. N.W.

14TH ST. N.W.

FERN ST. N.W.

Mixed Use

13TH PL. N.W.

5

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Other De
N

Source: Perkins+Will.

0’

200’

400’

Page 11

Final Environmental Impact Statement

To the east, 66.5 acres would be developed by the District of Columbia’s WRAMC Local
Redevelopment Authority (DC-LRA) as a mixed-use development (Exhibit 1.7). The proposed
DC-LRA plan has been created to respond to the physical and market conditions of potential
new uses of the property.
The proposed DC-LRA reuse plan creates a site that is reconnected with the neighborhood
community and includes uses that are compatible with existing and proposed functions in the
area. The DC-LRA envisions the site as a mix of open spaces and retail, residential uses with
diverse housing options, commercial offices, institutional spaces, medical care facilities, and
cultural and community uses.

1.5

FEDERAL DECISIONS AND ACTIONS

DOS is the lead federal agency for the proposed action. DOS, with input from the public and
other federal and district agencies, would decide future actions in accordance with the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and related legislation and Presidential Executive Orders
(EOs). The NEPA requires federal agencies to consider the potential impacts to the natural and
human environment from their actions as part of their decision-making process, and to disclose
the potential impacts in a document that is circulated for public review. The NEPA process is
intended to help public officials make decisions based on an understanding of the environmental
consequences and to take actions that protect, restore, and enhance the environment (40 Code
of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 1500.1).
Several federal agencies participated in the alternatives development process by providing
informal recommendations to DOS. These agencies were the Commission of Fine Arts (CFA),
the National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC), and the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation (ACHP). The CFA is an independent agency established in 1910 by Act of Congress
charged with giving expert advice to the President, Congress and the heads of departments and
agencies of the Federal and District of Columbia governments on matters of design and aesthetics
as they affect the federal interest and preserve the dignity of the Nation’s capital. Within the
District of Columbia community, the CFA advises on design matters affecting the WRAMC and
Rock Creek Park, as well as other private sector areas adjacent to federal interests. Under 45
CFR § 2101.1(a), CFA comments and advises on the plans and the merits of the designs before
final approval or action for public buildings to be erected in the city by the Federal government.
Under 40 U.S.C. § 8722, NCPC has approval authority over site and building designs for federal
public buildings in the District of Columbia and its metropolitan area, and uses NCPC-approved
master plans and policies found in the Comprehensive Plan for the National Capital as the basis
for subsequent reviews and approvals.
DOS and NCPC signed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) on February 27, 2017 pursuant to
40 U.S.C. § 8722 and the FMA (22 U.S.C. 4302), defining the review process for new chanceries
at the FMC. The FMA allows exercise of authority under other laws pertaining to the location,
replacement, and expansion of chanceries, provided the authority is exercised in a manner

Page 12

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

consistent with the requirements of the FMA. The MOA states that NCPC shall undertake the
sole review of applications for the location, replacement, or expansion of chanceries at the FMC.
The parameters for NCPC’s review shall be those established by the FMA, including, without
limitation 22 U.S.C. § 4306(b)(2); 22 U.S.C. § 4306(c)(2)-(3); 22 U.S.C. § 4306(d)(1)-(6); and
22 U.S.C. § 4306(f). The process shall include public participation by those members of the
public who express an interest, but only comments addressed to the requirements of the FMA
at 22 U.S.C. § 4306(d)(1)-(6) shall be considered.
The ACHP is an independent federal agency that administers historic preservation matters and
oversees the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) Section 106 review process (review
of impacts on historic properties).
District agencies that participated in the alternatives development process by providing informal
recommendations to DOS were the DC Historic Preservation Office (DC-HPO) and the DC-LRA.
The DC-HPO promotes stewardship of the District of Columbia’s historic and cultural resources
through planning, protection, and public education. DC-HPO is part of the DC Office of Planning
and serves as the staff for the Historic Preservation Review Board and the Mayor’s Agent for
historic preservation. DC-HPO implements federal historic preservation programs as the Historic
Preservation Office for the District of Columbia, responsible for protecting the city’s unique
historical, archaeological, architectural, and cultural resources. This responsibility is shared
with each federal agency that administers properties or undertakes construction activities within
the city. In accordance with the Base Realignment and Closure Act (BRAC) law, the District
of Columbia established the DC-LRA by Mayoral Order 2006-21. The District of Columbia is
the only jurisdiction comprising the DC-LRA and is recognized by the Department of Defense,
Office of Economic Adjustment. The Mayor of the District of Columbia established the Walter
Reed DC-LRA Committee to oversee the preparation of its Reuse Plan which was created by
the District government and is administered by the Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning
and Economic Development (DMPED). The DC-LRA is overseeing the redevelopment of the
other portion of the WRAMC site.

1.6 PURPOSE OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
STATEMENT (EIS)
The purpose of this EIS is to provide DOS and the public with a full accounting of the potential
environmental impacts of the alternatives developed for meeting the proposed action’s purpose
and needs. The EIS serves as the primary document to facilitate review of the proposed action
by federal, state, and local agencies and the public. It is intended to provide a full and fair
discussion of the potential significant environmental impacts from the proposed action and
inform decision-makers and the public of reasonable alternatives that would avoid or minimize
adverse impacts or enhance the quality of the human environment (40 CFR Part 1502.1). An
EIS must briefly discuss the purpose and needs for the proposed action, the range of alternatives
considered, the resultant environmental impacts from the proposed action, and the agencies and
people consulted during the planning of the proposed action. The ultimate objective of this EIS

Page 13

Final Environmental Impact Statement

is to identify a solution that furthers the proposed action’s purpose, satisfies the needs of the
proposed action, and minimizes adverse environmental and social impacts at an affordable cost.
The EIS was first circulated publicly as a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) in
February 2014. Following publication of the DEIS, a public open
Exhibit 1.7 - EIS Process house was held on February 20, 2014, and a public hearing was held
on March 6, 2014 to solicit additional public input into the planning
Notice of Intent
and decision-making process (Exhibit 1.7). Additionally, public
to Prepare an EIS
input was accepted during the 45-day comment period following
publication of the DEIS. Subsequent to the publication of the DEIS,
the total acreage of the land available for transfer from the Army
Public and Agency Scoping
to DOS was reduced from 43.5 to 31.7 acres through the National
Defense Authorization Act of 2015. Because of the change in the
proposed action, DOS prepared a Supplemental DEIS (SDEIS) in
March 2017 to describe the new Selected Alternative, and evaluate
DEIS Published
changes in potential impacts from the reduction in size of the
proposed action. Comments from other federal agencies, district
agencies, and the public on the DEIS were used to assist DOS in
Public and Agency Comment
identifying the Selected Alternative and refining the analysis of
Period Public Hearing
impacts. Following publication of the SDEIS, a public hearing
was held on April 20, 2017 and a 45-day public comment period
occurred to solicit additional public input. Comments received on
FEIS Published
the SDEIS were used in preparing this FEIS.

Record of Decision

Page 14

Publication of the FEIS is followed by DOS issuing a Record of
Decision (ROD) explaining the rationale for choosing the Selected
Alternative and describing the implementation of the Selected
Alternative. The ROD:

◊

States the DOS decision.

◊

Identifies all alternatives considered by the agency in reaching its decision, amd specifies
the alternative or alternatives which were considered to be environmentally preferable. An
agency may discuss preferences among alternatives based on relevant factors including
economic and technical considerations and agency statutory missions. An agency shall
identify and discuss all such factors including any essential considerations of national
policy that were balanced by the agency in making its decision and state how those
considerations entered into its decision.

◊

States whether all practicable means to avoid or minimize environmental harm from the
alternative selected have been adopted, and, if not, why they were not. A monitoring
and enforcement program shall be adopted and summarized where applicable for any
mitigation (40 CFR Part 1505.2).

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

1.7

SCOPE OF ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS

Public participation is integral to the preparation of an EIS. This section summarizes the issues and
concerns that were identified during the public scoping process held from June 18 through August
10, 2012 and where those issues are addressed in this EIS (Exhibit 1.8). Scoping is a process for
determining the range of issues to be addressed in an EIS and for identifying significant issues
associated with the alternatives (40 CFR Part 1501.7). The objectives of the scoping process are to
notify those interested—other federal, district, and local agencies, tribes, and other groups—about
the alternatives being considered; solicit comments about environmental issues, alternatives, and
other items of interest; and consider those comments in the preparation of the EIS.
Scoping for the EIS began with DOS issuing its notice of intent to prepare an EIS, which
was published in the Federal Register June 18, 2012. The notice of intent invited individuals,
organizations, and agencies to submit comments concerning the scope of the EIS. The comment
period ended on August 10, 2012, and DOS considered the comments received in defining the
scope of the analysis performed and documented in the EIS.
A public scoping meeting was held July 19, 2012, in the District of Columbia. This meeting consisted
of an open house with displays, a presentation, and time for public comments and questions to
be considered in the planning of the proposed action and preparation of the EIS. Approximately
55 people attended the scoping meeting including residents, community leaders, members of the
press, elected officials, and District of Columbia government agency representatives.

1.8 APPLICABLE REGULATIONS, EXECUTIVE
ORDERS, AND REQUIRED PERMITS AND APPROVALS
Many statutes and EOs apply to the proposed action and were considered during the planning
and conceptual design of the proposed action and preparation of this EIS (Exhibit 1.9).
District of Columbia Department of Transportation (DDOT) permits would be required in order
for the private roads on the FMC property to connect with the District's road network.

Page 15

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 1.8 - Issues Identification and Tracking
Issue

Addressed in
Particular Section
of the FEIS

Consider the preservation of native
plants, trees, and open spaces.

1.2 Description of
the Proposed Action,
2.3, Alternatives
Retained for Further
Consideration and
Detailed Study, 3.3
Vegetation

The proposed action considers and includes the preservation of
open spaces, existing trees and other vegetation, and maintaining
and creating vegetated buffers from the adjacent land uses along
16th Street, Alaska Avenue, and Fern Street.

Address light pollution by
considering environmentally
sensitive lighting.

See Remarks

Specific types of lighting and light shielding would be considered
during preliminary and final design of the Selected Alternative.

3.14 Energy

Countries wishing to locate a chancery on the FMC would be
encouraged to voluntarily pledge to be substantially compliant
with building codes and green building standards that promote
sustainability.

Encourage countries wishing to
locate a chancery on the site to
voluntarily pledge to be Leadership
in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) Certified.

Remarks

Consider preserving the Memorial
Chapel (Building 57) and the Walter 3.12.2 Historic
Reed Army Institute of Research
Resources
(WRAIR) building (Building 40).

Memorial Chapel would be preserved. The WRAIR building
(Building 40) may be preserved.

Minimize adverse impacts on the
cultural and historic landscape. The
Army plans to nominate the entire
installation as a historic district,
both on the District of Columbia
Inventory and the National Register
of Historic Places.

3.12.2 Historic
Resources

The proposed action has been planned to minimize adverse
impacts on the cultural and historic landscape.

Would there be a separate water
system, sewage, fire, police system?

1.2 Description of
the Proposed Action,
3.9.1.3 Community
Facilities and
Services

Utilities at the FMC would consist of water, stormwater drainage
and treatment, sanitary sewer, data and telecommunications,
electric, natural gas. Street lighting would be provided.
Stormwater would be managed on-site at each chancery,
including gray water reuse and bioretention gardens. The
stormwater system for roads would connect to the District of
Columbia system. Utilities would be underground within the
street/sidewalk ROW. Utility service would be provided to each
chancery lot. DC emergency services would be responsible for
the FMC.

Tear down the Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology (AFIP)
(Building 54).

Building 54 is located on the portion of the former WRAMC
1.2 Description of the
now controlled by the CNMC. The CNMC plans to reuse the
Proposed Action
building as a medical research facility.

What exactly would the space
be used for? We hear embassies
and chanceries but could we have
a description that includes the
possible number of embassies/
chanceries and associated staff who
might work there? How many do
you envision? Would it include
residential space for them?

The proposed action consists of the long-term assignment
of federal land to foreign governments for the purpose of
1.2 Description of the
constructing and operating chancery facilities. A maximum of
Proposed Action
15 lots would be available within the FMC, and countries would
have the option to combine lots if desired.

Continued on Following Page

Page 16

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1.8 - Issues Identification and Tracking (Continued)
Issue

Addressed in
Particular Section
of the FEIS

Remarks
The proposed action would accommodate bike travel on internal
roads, provide crosswalks and all-way stops at FMC entrances,
and provide short- and long-term bicycle parking. DOS would
provide land, installation funding, and one year's operating
expenses for a Capital Bikeshare station at the northeast corner
of the Dahlia Street and 14th Street intersection. DOS would
also fund the installation and first year's operating expenses for a
second Capital Bikeshare station at the Takoma Metrorail station
or in the adjacent neighborhood. The proposed action would
accommodate bike travel on internal roads.

Please encourage countries wishing
to locate a chancery on the site to
voluntarily pledge to work with
other chanceries and the DDOT
to locate one or more Capitol
Bikeshare stations on areas they are
leasing. Use this pledge as one of
the criteria for determining which
countries would receive leases.

3.6.4 Pedestrian
Facilities, 3.6.5
Bicycle Facilities

Is there a perimeter fence going
in place between the District of
Columbia and the foreign mission
centers for security issues?

The existing historic perimeter fence along the 16th Street
and Alaska Avenue frontages would be retained. Fencing
1.2 Description of the standards for individual chanceries are listed in the FMC design
Proposed Action
guidelines. The maximum height for fences on individual lots
shall be no greater than three meters above the finish grade of
the sidewalk.

How many entrances and exits are
planned?

3.6.1 Vehicle Traffic

Would there be security on the site?

1.2 Description of the The U.S. Secret Service Uniformed Division is responsible for
Proposed Action
security of foreign missions and would patrol the area.

Vehicular access to the FMC would be provided at three
locations: Main Drive, Alaska Avenue and Dahlia Street, and
Dahlia Street.

What country’s chanceries would be
See Remarks
located at the FMC?

The specific countries that could locate at the FMC are
unknown.

Support local business during the
design and construction phase.

3.10 Socioeconomics

Federal contracting solicitations related to the FMC construction
and operation will be posted on the Federal Business
Opportunities (www.fbo.gov) website and DOS encourages
interested local businesses to review these opportunities.

Would the public have access to the
site and would there be walking and
biking trails?

3.6.4 Pedestrian
Facilities, 3.6.5
Bicycle Facilities

The FMC would be open to the public, with pedestrian and
bicycle access.

Why is this site appealing to the
DOS for the chanceries? Are there
other sites available?

2.1 Selection of
the WRAMC as
Proposed FMC Site

After years of considering the suitability of other locations
throughout the District of Columbia, DOS concluded the former
WRAMC site was the most viable option given its size, location,
and opportunity for purpose-built chanceries.

Consider the traffic issues during
all phases of the project, including
truck traffic.

3.6 Transportation

The potential traffic impacts of the proposed action have been
considered.

3.6.1 Vehicle Traffic

Existing buildings that are reused would be required to develop
independent parking solutions, and new buildings would be
required to incorporate parking within their parcel boundaries.
On-street parking would not be permitted.

Address the impacts to public
parking for neighbors.

Continued on Following Page

Page 17

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 1.8 - Issues Identification and Tracking (Continued)
Issue

Addressed in
Particular Section
of the FEIS

Remarks
The proposed action concept complements the campus character
and is consistent with current and future adjacent land uses by:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Have a consistent design with the
existing neighborhood and use
smart growth concepts.

1.2 Description of the 5.
Proposed Action
6.
7.
8.

Address stormwater management
through landscaping and pervious
paving for walkways, parking, and
other areas that might otherwise be
paved.

Page 18

3.2.1 Surface Waters

Keeping access to all lots internal to the former WRAMC
campus;
Allowing full public access to the site;
Developing a reuse program for one historic building and
maximizing the potential reuse of other historic buildings;
Maintaining a 30-foot setback between the southern
boundary of the FMC and historic Main Drive;
Emphasizing a pedestrian connection between the FMC and
the adjacent DC-LRA mixed-use redevelopment site to the
east;
Maintaining a 50-foot vegetated buffer on the west
boundary of the FMC and preserving the tree canopy where
possible;
Delineating a formal east/west open space axis to unite
different portions of the FMC with the DC-LRA development;
and
Having massing and density that complements the
surrounding neighborhoods.

Stormwater would be managed on-site at each chancery, and
by DOS for infrastructure including gray water reuse and
bioretention gardens. The stormwater system for roads would
connect to the District of Columbia system. The streets on
the DOS managed portion of the former WRAMC will also
include a bioretention system, in the form of the 14th Street
parkway and tree boxes, to limit impact on existing DC system
infrastructure.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1.9 - Applicable Statutes and Executive Orders
Law or Executive
Order

Requirements

Implications and Resulting Actions

American Indian
Religious Freedom Act

To respect the practice of traditional
Identify potentially concerned tribes and consult with
American Indian religions, including access
them during NEPA analyses.
to religious sites and use of ceremonial items.

Archaeological and
Historical Preservation
Act

Requires federal agencies to identify and
recover data from archaeological sites
threatened by an action taken by the federal
agency.

Conduct surveys, identify archaeological sites,
consult with specialists and others during NEPA
process and fund data recovery.

Archaeological
Resources Protection Act

Requires permits and provides for civil
and criminal penalties for disturbing
archaeological resources on federal and tribal
land without a permit.

Archaeologists performing investigations
on federal or Indian land must meet permit
requirements (43 CFR 7; also 36 CFR 79, and 43
CFR 3).

Architectural Barriers
Act

Requires public buildings to be accessible to
persons with disabilities.

Consider accessibility issues and the environmental
impact of accessibility solutions during the NEPA
process.

Clean Air Act (CAA)

Requires agencies to comply with state air
quality standards set in State Implementation
Plans (SIPs).

Review SIPs, measure current air quality, project
potential changes, seek alternatives that meet
standards during the NEPA process (40 CFR 50).

Clean Water Act

Requires a permit from the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers for actions affecting “Waters of
the United States.”

Identify potentially affected waters, consult with
Corps during the NEPA and permitting processes,
explore alternatives to avoid and minimize adverse
impacts (33 CFR 320-330; 40 CFR 35, 116, 117,
122, 124, 125,131,133, 220, 401, 403).

Community
Environmental Response
Facilitation Act

Requires identification of uncontaminated
property and disclosure of information on
possible hazards.

Investigations into the possible hazards and
remediation studies.

Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Requires reporting of releases and clean-up
Compensation, and
of hazardous substances.
Liability Act

Investigations into the possible hazards and
remediation studies (40 CFR 373; 41 CFR 101-47).

Endangered Species Act
(ESA)

Requires consultation with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS) and/or National
Marine Fisheries Service to ensure actions
do not jeopardize threatened or endangered
species or their critical habitat.

Analyze impacts on fish, wildlife, plants, habitats;
ecosystem analysis, consultation with the USFWS
and/or National Marine Fisheries Service where
potential impacts exist (50 CFR 402).

Environmental Quality
Improvement Act

National policy for enhancement of
environmental quality, assigns primary
responsibility to state and local governments.

Underscores the need for quality NEPA process and
analysis and environmentally sensitive decisions,
consultation with state and local governments.

Federal Facility
Compliance Act

Requires federal facilities comply with state
and local environmental laws and federal
environmental laws.

Ascertain applicable state and local laws and apply
during the NEPA process and alternative selection.

Federal Records Act

Controls maintenance and disposal of
government documents with historical value.

Identify potentially affected documents (e.g., in
buildings being disposed of) and address during the
NEPA process (36 CFR 1222, 1228, 1230, 1232,
1234, 1236, and 1238).

Fish and Wildlife
Coordination Act

Requires consultation with the USFWS on
actions affecting stream modifications.

Study potential impacts on streams and consult
with the USFWS.

Flood Disaster Protection Prohibits some federal actions in areas
Act
subject to flood hazards.

Delineate floodplains and seek alternatives that do
not promote floodplain development and flooding
(see EO 11988 and EO 11990).
Continued on Following Page

Page 19

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 1.9 - Applicable Statutes and Executive Orders (Continued)
Law or Executive
Order

Requirements

Implications and Resulting Actions

Historic Sites Act

Establishes National Historic Landmark
program and policy to preserve sites,
buildings, and objects significant in history.

Consider impacts on National Historic Landmarks
(36 CFR 65).

NEPA of 1969

Requires federal agencies to consider and
document environmental impacts during
planning and disclose them in a public
document.

Consider impacts on the quality of the human
environment guided by national policy (40 CFR
1500-1508).

NHPA

Requires federal agencies to identify historic
properties potentially affected by their
actions and to consult with the State Historic
Preservation Officer and others about
alternatives, the effects, and mitigation.

Conduct surveys to identify historic properties,
determine potential effects, consult others, and
execute and implement agreements (36 CFR 800;
also 36 CFR 60, 61, 65, 68).

Native American
Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act

Requires consultation with Indian tribes and
the repatriation of human remains, cultural
items, and other items. Requires development
and implementation of a Plan of Action for
treatment.

Identify culturally affiliated tribes or groups,
consult with them, seek to develop plans of action,
document the results during the NEPA process, and
implement as mitigation (43 CFR 10).

Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act
(RCRA)

Regulates hazardous and solid waste, and
underground storage tanks (USTs).

Investigations into the possible hazards and
remediation studies (40 CFR 260-281).

Safe Drinking Water Act

Sets standards for drinking water quality and
regulates activities affecting drinking water
supplies.

Analyze existing water quality and potential
impacts on it (40 CFR 141).

Superfund Amendments
and Reauthorization Act

Requires plans for cleanup of contaminated
sites, and disclosure to the public of
hazardous materials and processes.

Investigations into possible hazards and
remediation studies (40 CFR 373).

Regulates chemical substances, including
Toxic Substances Control
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and
Act
asbestos.

Consideration during the NEPA process (40 CFR
761).

EO 11514 Protection
and Enhancement of
Environmental Quality

Requires agencies to monitor, evaluate, and
control activities to protect and enhance the
quality of the environment.

Underscores the need for quality analyses during
the NEPA process and monitoring of mitigation
measures.

EO 11593 Protection
and Enhancement of the
Cultural Environment

Requires agencies to identify, evaluate, and
protect historic properties.

Same requirements as NHPA.

EO 11988 Floodplain
Management

Requires federal agencies to evaluate the
potential impacts of actions in a floodplain
and consider alternatives to avoid adverse
impacts.

Delineate floodplains and consider the impacts
on floodplain values and potential development
of floodplains. Consider alternatives to impacting
floodplains.

EO 11990 Protection of
Wetlands

Requires agencies to minimize destruction,
loss, or degradation of wetlands.

Delineate wetlands and consider alternatives that
avoid and minimize impacts to wetlands and
mitigation to minimize impacts.

EO 12088 Federal
Compliance with
Pollution Control
Standards

To prevent, control, and abate environmental Investigations into the possible hazards and
pollution from federal facilities and activities. remediation studies.

Continued on Following Page

Page 20

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1.9 - Applicable Statutes and Executive Orders (Continued)
Law or Executive
Order

Requirements

Implications and Resulting Actions

EO 12372
Intergovernmental
Review of Federal
Programs

To provide for review of its actions by state
and local elected officials.

Consult with state and local governments during
the NEPA process.

EO 12898 Federal
Actions to Address
Environmental Justice
(EJ) in Minority
Populations and LowIncome Populations

Requires federal agencies to identify and
address any disproportionately high and
adverse human health or environmental
effects of its programs, policies, and
activities on minority populations and
low-income populations.

Conduct social impact analyses, identify
potentially affected populations, involve them
during the NEPA process, make adjustments in
public involvement to accommodate them, seek
alternatives that avoid disproportionately adverse
impacts.

EO 13006 Locating
Federal Facilities on
Historic Properties in our
Nation's Central Cities

Requires federal agencies to give priority
to the use of historic buildings in historic
districts in central business areas.

Identify historic buildings in central business areas,
analyze their use potential, consider as priority
alternatives during the NEPA process.

EO 13045 Protection
of Children from
Environmental Health
Risks and Safety Risks

Requires federal agencies to make it
a high priority to identify and assess
environmental health and safety risks that
may disproportionately affect children;
and address these risks in their policies,
programs, activities, and standards.

Approximately 19% of the study area population
(4,132 persons) consists of children, or residents
under 18 years of age. In comparison, children
make up approximately 17% of the population of
the District of Columbia.

EO 13007 Indian Sacred
Sites

Requires federal agencies to avoid where
possible impeding access to, or physically
damaging, Indian sacred sites.

Consult with Indian Tribes during the NEPA
process to identify possible impact and respect
confidentiality of information on sacred sites.

EO 13166 Involving
Access to Persons
with Limited English
Proficiency (LEP)

Requires federal agencies to improve access
to federally conducted and federally assisted
programs and activities for persons who, as
a result of national origin, are limited in their
English proficiency.

Conduct social impact analyses, to identify if LEP
populations are present and, if so, take reasonable
steps in public involvement activities to make
project information more accessible to LEP
populations.

EO 13508 Chesapeake
Bay Protection and
Restoration

Provides guidance for federal land
management within Chesapeake Bay
watershed to prevent water pollution.

Consider incorporating water pollution control
tools and strategies identified through EO for
federal agencies.

EO 13693 Planning for
Federal Sustainability in
the Next Decade

Provides guidance for federal agencies to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and
energy usage.

Consider recommending energy efficiency
measures and design standards that promote
sustainability.

Page 21

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 22

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

2.0 ALTERNATIVES ANALYSIS
DOS identified, developed, and analyzed the No Action
Alternative and seven action alternatives that could
potentially satisfy the proposed action’s purpose and needs.
In developing and analyzing alternatives, DOS consulted
with regulatory and resource agencies at the federal and
district levels and with the public. During the alternatives
development process, six action alternatives were dismissed
because they did not meet the needs and requirements as
well as the Selected Action Alternative did.
DOS has identified a Selected Action Alternative which
it considers would best fulfill its statutory mission and
responsibilities, while giving consideration to economic,
environmental, technical, and other factors. In identifying
its Selected Action Alternative, DOS judges it has identified
the environmentally preferable alternative because it best
meets the purpose and needs for the study; causes the least
damage to the biological and physical environment; and
best protects, preserves, and enhances the historic, cultural,
and natural resources of the study area. The Selected Action
Alternative and No Action Alternative were retained for
further consideration and more detailed analysis.

2.1 SELECTION OF WRAMC AS
PROPOSED FMC SITE
The site selection process for a new FMC was conducted by
DOS and the NCPC. In 2003, NCPC completed the Foreign
Missions in the District of Columbia Future Location
Analysis, which identified opportunities and recommended
regulatory changes to guide the future location of foreign
missions within the District of Columbia. The analysis
recommended creating a new chancery center. Potential
FMC sites identified in the analysis consisted of:

Chapter 2 presents the alternatives
analysis. It introduces the range of
reasonable action alternatives developed
to meet the study's purpose and needs
and identifies DOS’s Selected Action
Alternative for further study. It identifies
those alternatives retained for or
dismissed from more detailed study
and the reasons for their retention or
dismissal.

The regulations on implementing the
NEPA (40 CFR 1502.14) require that
the lead agency:
a.

Rigorously explore and objectively
evaluate all reasonable alternatives
and briefly discuss the reasons for
elimination of alternatives from
detailed study.

b.

Devote substantial treatment to each
alternative considered in detail,
including the proposed action, so
that reviewers may evaluate their
comparative merits.

c.

Include reasonable alternatives not
within the jurisdiction of the lead
agency.

d.

Include the alternative of no action.

e.

Identify the agency’s Selected
Alternative or alternatives, if one
or more exists, in the DEIS and
identify such alternative in the
FEIS, unless another law prohibits
the expression of such a preference.

f.

Include appropriate mitigation
measures not already included in
the proposed action or alternatives.

◊

U.S. Naval Security Station, Nebraska and
Massachusetts Avenue—38 acres.

◊

St. Elizabeth’s Hospital, Alabama Avenue, SE, undefined acreage available resulting
from a planned redevelopment of the campus.

◊

Armed Forces Retirement Home (AFRH), North Capital Street & Michigan Avenue—77
acres.

Page 23

Final Environmental Impact Statement

◊

South Capitol Street Corridor/Anacostia River waterfront, specifically the Southeast
Federal Center (10 acres) and the Anacostia Naval Station (14 acres). These areas offered
potential for smaller or “mini” FMC campuses.

The U.S. Naval Security Station was subsequently dismissed from further consideration due to
the presence of the newly established, and rapidly expanding, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security at that location.
St. Elizabeth’s Hospital, formerly owned by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
was turned over to the General Services Administration (GSA) as excess property in 2004. In 2007,
GSA issued a Notice of Intent to prepare an EIS to redevelop the St. Elizabeth’s Campus to house
the headquarters of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Given the planned redevelopment
by GSA, St. Elizabeth’s was dismissed from consideration for a FMC (NCPC, 2003).
Based on the conclusions of the Future Location Analysis, NCPC revised the Federal Elements of
the Comprehensive Plan for the National Capital in 2006. The plan lists two potential sites for a
new chancery center: the AFRH and the South Capitol Street Corridor. The plan cites the possibility
for either federally owned and/or privately owned sites along the South Capitol Street Corridor.
DOS developed criteria for selecting a site. The criteria stated that a future center must:
◊

Be located in the District of Columbia;

◊

Be a minimum of 15 acres in size;

◊

Be a contiguous parcel of land to create a campus setting that will meet security and
marketability/desirability needs;

◊

Have existing utility infrastructure; and

◊

Provide convenient access to major traffic arteries and amenities.

Federally owned property in the South Capitol Street Corridor/Anacostia River waterfront was
subsequently dismissed from further consideration by DOS and NCPC because security and
marketability needs identified by DOS for the new center would be better met by a larger site
(>15 acres) with general similarity to the ICC.
The District of Columbia government, which has a continuing concern regarding the loss of
property from the tax roll due to federal ownership, supported the development of a new FMC
on federal land, which is already tax exempt. Therefore, due to: 1) local government preference,
2) the rapidly rising cost of private land in the District of Columbia during the national housing
and economic expansion, and 3) the limited availability of sufficiently large parcels, privately
owned property (both in the South Capitol Street Corridor and the investigation of other privately
owned sites) was dismissed from further consideration (NCPC, 2006).

Page 24

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

In 2005, the Department of Defense announced the closure of the WRAMC as part of the BRAC
process. WRAMC met the size and federal ownership criteria for a new center and was added
into consideration in March 2006.
DOS and NCPC dismissed the AFRH from further consideration and selected WRAMC as
the preferred location because the WRAMC site is more marketable than the AFRH site; the
WRAMC site is closer to existing concentrations of chanceries; and, at WRAMC, the DC-LRA
site would provide desirable amenities in a pedestrian-accessible adjacent location.

2.2 MASTER PLAN ALTERNATIVES IDENTIFICATION
AND DEVELOPMENT
DOS identified and developed potential design alternatives for WRAMC through collaborative
planning and design work sessions with other federal and district agencies with direct or indirect
jurisdiction over the proposed action, or an interest or special expertise, at key milestones to
receive feedback and suggestions for improvement. The first four work sessions focused on
individual components that would compose the range of reasonable action alternatives considered
for furthering the study purpose and fulfilling the needs. Components common to the action
alternatives consisted of cost-neutral funding, a minimum 50-year design life for utilities, on-lot
stormwater management, parking guidelines, and street design (see Section 1.2).
Site and individual lot development parameters (size, floor area ratio, building coverage, and
height restrictions) developed for each campus zone did not vary between the action alternatives.
Under the action alternatives, the existing historic perimeter fence along 16th Street and Alaska
Avenue would be retained. The existing landscape on the west boundary of the site would be
enhanced to create a 50-foot vegetated buffer, and the tree canopy would be preserved to the
extent reasonably possible. Access to individual lots would be internal to the campus.
The conditions in the study area and environmental features on the site of the former WRAMC
were reviewed with work session participants to inform the alternatives identification process,
with an emphasis on cultural resources, vegetation, topography, site contamination, other land
use planning initiatives, and traffic. A strong preference was expressed by DOS and other federal
and district agencies to incorporate green space as an amenity for increasing the marketability and
desirability of the FMC. Designs for green space were identified and evaluated. The number and
location of access points were also identified and evaluated to provide the most efficient traffic
flow and vehicle and pedestrian connections between the FMC and the DC-LRA development
and the surrounding neighborhoods.
Early in the process of identifying, developing, and analyzing alternatives that could potentially
further the proposed action’s purpose and satisfy its needs, assessment criteria were developed
to help differentiate the alternatives (Exhibit 2.1). The assessment criteria consisted of: 1)
maintaining and enhancing the existing site character, 2) responsiveness to the concerns raised
during scoping, 3) minimizing the potential impacts to cultural resources, and 4) maximizing the
marketability of the FMC as a whole and individual parcels by allowing development flexibility.

Page 25

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Two alternatives were retained for detailed study within the DEIS published in February 2014, the
No Action Alternative and Alternative 1, the DEIS Preferred Action Alternative. Subsequent to the
publication of the DEIS, the total acreage of the land available for transfer from the Army to DOS
was reduced from 43.5 to 31.7 acres through the National Defense Authorization Act of 2015.
DOS, in coordination with CFA, NCPC, DC-HPO, and DDOT, then developed Alternative 7,
which has been identified as the Selected Action Alternative. The Selected Action Alternative
adjusts the master plan design to reflect the acreage change, and to respond to comments from
other federal agencies, district agencies, and the public on the DEIS and SDEIS. During the
reevaluation of the DEIS Preferred Action Alternative, no information was found that would
require the reexamination of other alternatives previously dismissed from further consideration.

2.3 ALTERNATIVES RETAINED FOR FURTHER
CONSIDERATION AND DETAILED STUDY
Two alternatives were retained for further consideration and detailed study: the No Action
Alternative and Alternative 7: Selected Action Alternative.

Exhibit 2.1 - Alternatives Assessment Criteria
Maintains and enhances
the existing site
character
Addresses community
concerns raised during
scoping
Minimizes cultural
resource impacts
Maximizes
marketability by
allowing the greatest
development flexibility

•
•

Creates a denser zone north of Dahlia Street and a less dense zone south of Dahlia Street,
complementing the proposed DC-LRA zoning.
Provides a strong east-west connection between DC-LRA and FMC portions of the former
WRAMC by vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian travel via Dahlia Street.

•
•

Maximizes tree preservation on the western half of the site.
Provides an open campus with vehicular and pedestrian connectivity between adjacent
communities, the FMC, and the DC-LRA property.

•
•

Retains historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel for adaptive reuse.
Allows for the potential reuse of historic resources: Building 40 (WRAIR), Building 41 (Old
Red Cross Building). Viability of reuse is dependent upon marketability.
Alternative reviewed and supported by coordinating federal cultural resource agencies (NCPC,
CFA).

•
•
•

The variety of lot sizes provides options for DOS to market to foreign missions; parcels can
easily be combined to form larger lots.
The boulevard design of Dahlia and 14th Streets provides parity between lots; all lots have
important street frontage and orientation.

2.3.1 No Action Alternative
Under the No Action Alternative, DOS would not take ownership of the 31.7-acre portion of
the former WRAMC and would not create a master plan to develop the FMC. DOS would
face continued challenges in facilitating the provision of adequate and secure facilities for
foreign missions. The lack of readily available parcels within the District of Columbia for
the development of foreign mission facilities would persist, and the high demand for foreign
mission facilities would continue to grow. DOS's inability to reciprocally acquire properties in
other countries would increase, and a delay in updating U.S. diplomatic and consular properties
abroad to meet modern security requirements would continue.

Page 26

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The No Action Alternative was retained for detailed study and the consequences of the No Action
Alternative were fully developed for the year 2032 to demonstrate the full impact of taking no
action. This provides a baseline comparison with the action alternatives. The year 2032 represents
the earliest completion of the planned build-out of the FMC over an approximate 15-20-year period.

2.3.2 Alternative 7: Selected Action Alternative
The Selected Action Alternative would provide a maximum of 15 lots for chancery development
(Exhibit 2.2). Two or three smaller lots (between 0.9 and 1.7 acres) would surround the Chapel.
This design compliments the urban development pattern planned by CNMC and DC-LRA for this
zone of the former WRAMC. The design for this quadrant also allows for dense tree coverage
and accommodates the deep vegetative buffer along Alaska Avenue. Green space would surround
the chapel to help maintain its setting.
The section of 14th Street north of Dahlia Street would be moved approximately 30 feet to
the east to provide sufficient lot sizes in the northwest quadrant. The 14th Street intersection
with Dahlia Street would remain in its current location. The end of 14th Street is planned to
terminate in a cul-de-sac centered on Building 54/AFIP’s main entrance. Building 54, a historic
district contributing resource located on the CNMC portion of the former WRAMC, is planned
to be reused as a research laboratory. Access from the 14th Street cul-de-sac to Alaska Avenue
would be through a 25-foot wide access path, including a 12-foot paved section, that would
accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.
A second street layout option under consideration in the SDEIS was to extend 14th Street to Alaska
Avenue, adding a vehicular access point to the FMC and eliminating the turnaround in front of
Building 54. The through street layout option has been dismissed from further consideration
in the FEIS. The cul-de-sac option was retained for the Selected Action Alternative because it:
1. addresses neighborhood concerns about avoiding increased traffic on 14th Street north
of the FMC,
2. avoids impact to the contributing historic resource fence and is consistent with the
development history of the WRAMC during the period of historic significance of
interrupting continuity of the urban street grid,
3. maximizes funding and schedule feasibility because it would be constructed and
maintained by DOS, not an external partner, and
4. maximizes marketability by providing larger lot sizes and creating a unique condition with
strong appeal for members of the foreign mission community seeking privacy for chanceries.
On the southeastern portion of the site, Building 40/WRAIR, and historic Building 41/Old
Red Cross Building, both contributing resources to the WRAMC Historic District, could
remain for potential adaptive reuse, depending on marketability. During project coordination

Page 27

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 2.2 A - Selected Action Alternative
Legend
Potential Lot Boundaries
Project Area Boundary
Green Spaces
Trees
Tree Canopy
Potentially Reusable Buildings
Existing Building to Remain

Variation: 11 lots

N

Not to Scale
Continued on following page

Page 28

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 2.2 B - Selected Action Alternative
Legend
Potential Lot Boundaries
Project Area Boundary
Green Spaces
Trees
Tree Canopy
Potentially Reusable Buildings
Existing Building to Remain

Variation: 13 lots

N

Not to Scale
Continued on following page

Page 29

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 2.2 C - Selected Action Alternative
Legend
Potential Lot Boundaries
Project Area Boundary
Green Spaces
Trees
Tree Canopy
Potentially Reusable Buildings
Existing Building to Remain

Variation: 15 lots

N

Not to Scale
Continued on following page

Page 30

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

meetings, interest was expressed by foreign missions in reusing Building 20/Mologne House
and Building 32/Wagner Sports Center, which are not historic district contributing resources.
Several parcelization options under the Selected Action Alternative are provided to increase
flexibility and allow for the preservation or expansion of these existing buildings.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, Dahlia Street and 14th Street would be developed as
boulevards supporting pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic connections to the surrounding
neighborhoods. In the southwest quadrant, the boulevard landscaping bordering 14th Street would
be widened to create green space. This low-lying green space would assist with the filtration of
rain water from the FMC, reducing stormwater runoff. Several parcelization options are shown
for this quadrant to provide marketing flexibility and respond to foreign missions’ expressed
interest in reusing non-historic Building 56/Fisher House #3.

2.4 IDENTIFICATION OF DOS’S SELECTED ACTION
ALTERNATIVE
Alternative 7 was identified as the Selected Action Alternative because it furthers the purpose of
the project and satisfies the needs for the project while best: 1) maintaining and enhancing the
existing site character of the former WRAMC; 2) addressing community concerns raised during
scoping; 3) minimizing potential impacts to cultural resources; and 4) maximizing marketability
by allowing the greatest flexibility in developing the site.
The No Action Alternative would not further the purpose of the project to prepare a master plan to
establish a FMC at the former WRAMC. The No Action Alternative would not satisfy the project
needs to: 1) reduce the increasingly high demand for foreign mission facilities in the District of
Columbia; 2) increase the supply of readily available parcels for development or redevelopment of
foreign mission facilities; nor 3) improve DOS’s ability to reciprocally acquire properties in other
countries.

2.5 ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED BUT ELIMINATED
FROM DETAILED STUDY
Six other action alternatives were developed during the alternatives identification process but
dismissed from further consideration and detailed study. Alternatives 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 were
dismissed from detailed study for reasons described in the DEIS. Alternative 1 was dismissed
from detailed study within the SDEIS because it was no longer viable given the change in total
acreage required by the National Defense Authorization Act of 2015. Under the design for
Alternative 1, the 31.7 remaining acres would have provided between four and seven chancery
lots, which would be insufficient to meet the purpose and need for the project.
Alternatives 1-6 are described in detail in the DEIS and summarized briefly below. Because
these alternatives were developed for the original 43.5-acre parcel, their descriptions include
some acreage and buildings that are no longer part of the DOS property.

Page 31

Final Environmental Impact Statement

2.5.1 Alternative 1
Alternative 1 would provide a maximum of 24 lots for chancery development. In the northwest
quadrant, historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel would be retained for adaptive reuse. Green space
would surround the chapel and existing trees of good condition in the quadrant would remain.
On the eastern portion of the site, historic Building 52/Medical Warehouse and Clinic, Building
40/WRAIR, and historic Building 41/Old Red Cross Building could remain for potential adaptive
reuse, depending on marketability. The location of 13th Place would either remain the same, or
be moved slightly to the east, in alignment with Building 41 (requiring the provision of a new
entry in the existing perimeter fence).
Dahlia Street and 14th Street would be developed as boulevards. In the southwest quadrant, the
boulevard landscaping bordering 14th Street would be widened to create green space.

2.5.2 Alternative 2
In the northwest quadrant, Alternative 2 would retain Historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel for
adaptive reuse, and provide two lots for development. In the southwest quadrant, Alternative 2
would provide up to five lots. The existing cul-de-sac would be converted to a one-way access
road surrounding an orthogonal open space.
In the northeast quadrant, Elder Street would be extended from the DC-LRA site west to 14th
Street. The location of 13th Place would be moved to the east and terminated at Elder Street.
Several lots would be organized around a central linear green space. Historic Building 52/Medical
Warehouse and Clinic could remain for potential adaptive reuse.
Alternative 2 would provide east-west and north-south linear green spaces in the southeast
quadrant. Historic Building 41/Old Red Cross Building and a historic portion of Building 40/
WRAIR could remain for potential adaptive reuse. Lots along Main Drive would be accessed
from Main Drive.

2.5.3 Alternative 3
In the northwest quadrant, Alternative 3 would retain Historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel for
adaptive reuse, and provide two lots for development. In the southwest quadrant, Alternative 3
would provide up to five lots. The existing cul-de-sac would be moved to the east and widened.
In the northeast quadrant, linear green space would extend between Fern Street and Dahlia Street.
Historic Building 52/Medical Warehouse and Clinic could remain for potential adaptive reuse.
Alternative 3 would provide east-west and north-south linear green spaces in the southeast
quadrant. Historic Building 41/Old Red Cross Building could remain for potential adaptive reuse.
Because the linear green space would be centered to the west of the historic Building 40/WRAIR
axis, Building 40 would be removed. Lots along Main Drive would be accessed from Main Drive.

Page 32

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

2.5.4 Alternative 4
In the northwest quadrant, historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel would be retained for adaptive
reuse. Open green space would surround the chapel and existing trees in the quadrant would
remain undisturbed. In the southwest quadrant, Alternative 4 would provide up to six lots.
The existing cul-de-sac would be moved to the east and converted to a one-way access road
surrounding a square open space.
Alternative 4 would create boulevards extending north to south along 14th Street and 13th Place.
The location of 13th Place would be extended south to Main Drive. In the southwest quadrant,
the boulevard landscaping bordering 14th Street to the west would be widened to create green
space across the existing steep slope.
Because of the street layout, lot sizes under Alternative 4 would be relatively uniform. On the
eastern portion of the site, historic Building 52/Medical Warehouse and Clinic and historic
Building 41/Old Red Cross Building could remain for potential adaptive reuse.

2.5.5 Alternative 5
In the northwest quadrant, Alternative 5 would retain Historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel for
adaptive reuse, and provide two lots for development. In the southwest quadrant, Alternative 5
would provide up to four lots. The existing cul-de-sac would be removed. Dahlia Street would
dead end before reaching Alaska Avenue.
In the eastern portion of the site, a single large open green space would be created north of Dahlia
Street. Historic Building 52/Medical Warehouse and Clinic and historic Building 41/Old Red
Cross Building could remain for potential adaptive reuse. In the southeast quadrant, fewer and
larger parcels would be provided in comparison to other alternatives.

2.5.6 Alternative 6
In the northwest quadrant, Alternative 6 would retain Historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel for
adaptive reuse, and provide two lots for development. In the southwest quadrant, Alternative 6
would provide up to six lots. The existing cul-de-sac would be moved to the east and converted
to a one-way access road surrounding a square open space.
Two additional square open green spaces would be created in the eastern half of the site. Historic
Building 52/Medical Warehouse and Clinic and historic Building 41/Old Red Cross Building
could remain for potential adaptive reuse. In the southeast quadrant, 13th Place would be
extended south to Main Drive.

Page 33

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 34

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

3.0 AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT
AND ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSEQUENCES
This chapter identifies the affected environment, potential
environmental consequences, mitigation measures, and
commitments associated with the implementation of the No
Action and Selected Action Alternatives retained for further
consideration and detailed analysis. Potential impacts—both
beneficial and adverse—were identified and, where possible,
quantified through studies of the natural, social, and economic
environments. Potential impacts include the direct impacts,
indirect impacts, and cumulative impacts of the No Action and
Selected Action Alternatives.

Chapter 3 is an inventory of
the affected environment and a
discussion of consequences and
potential mitigation measures
resulting from the alternatives
retained for detailed study. It
succinctly describes the physical,
biological, social, and economic
environments of the area to be
affected by the alternatives. It
describes the impacts of the
alternatives; the adverse effects that
cannot be avoided if implemented;
the relationship between short-term
uses of the human environment and
the maintenance and enhancement
of long-term productivity; and
any irreversible or irretrievable
commitments of resources that
would result if an alternative is
implemented (40 CFR part 1502.16).

DOS developed a study area of approximately 350 acres for the
consideration of potential impacts to the social and economic
environments in the area (Exhibit 3.1); a smaller area was
used for the consideration of potential impacts to the natural
environment (Exhibit 3.2). The study area not only covers the
land that would be used for the Selected Action Alternative, but
also the area that would potentially experience direct, indirect, and cumulative impacts from it.

Only those resources that have the potential to be impacted by the Selected Action Alternative
were analyzed. The following resources were not evaluated in this EIS:
◊

Wetlands – Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions. Wetlands generally consist of swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas
(USACE, 1987). No wetlands or other Waters of the U.S. are found on the site of the
former WRAMC.

◊

Wild and Scenic Rivers – The National Wild and Scenic Rivers System was created
from the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 U.S.C. 1271, et seq.) of 1968 to preserve
certain rivers with outstanding natural, cultural, and recreational values in a free-flowing
condition for the enjoyment of present and future generations. River segments designated
by Congress or the U.S. Department of the Interior are classified as wild river areas,
scenic river areas, or recreational river areas. The act requires federal agencies to consider
impacts of proposed actions on designated river segments. No wild or scenic rivers are
in the study area.

Page 35

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.1 - Socioeconomic Study Area

Legend

N

Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary

Page 36

Study Area Boundary
Census Block Group
######

Census Tract

0’

400’

800’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.2 - Natural Resources Study Area
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Natural Resources
Study Area Boundary
100-Year Floodplain

N

0’

400’

800’

Page 37

Final Environmental Impact Statement

3.1

PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

The physical geography or physiography of an area is a description of the physical features of
the natural landscape. The physical geography and geology of the study area may influence
the alternatives development and selection process as natural landforms and geologic features
may determine the extent of environmental features and potential constraints to development
or extraordinary engineering solutions.
The study area is along the eastern edge of the Piedmont Physiographic Province of the
Appalachian Highlands. The Piedmont’s topography is characterized by gently rolling hills
and level uplands strongly dissected by streams that have steep valley walls (USGS, 2012).
The original topography of the study area has been extensively altered by grading and construction
to create an urban and suburban area. The study area has an elevation range of over 100 feet,
from 244 feet above mean sea level near 16th Street to 352 feet above mean sea level near 14th
Street and Alaska Avenue. The study area slopes to the south and west towards Rock Creek.
Some steep slopes (over 30 percent) are found in the study area.
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not alter the existing physical geography
of the study area. No substantial change in the profile or elevation of land within the study area
would be likely to occur from the Selected Action Alternative.

3.1.1 Climate
The District of Columbia is in the humid subtropical climate zone and has four distinct seasons.
Summers are hot and humid with daily high temperatures in July and August averaging in the high
80 to low 90 degrees Fahrenheit range. Spring and fall are mild with high temperatures in April
and October averaging in the high 60 degrees Fahrenheit. The average temperature in winter is
38 degrees Fahrenheit from mid-December to mid-February. The average annual precipitation
in this area is approximately 40 inches of rain and average snowfall is 16 inches (NOAA, 2012).
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact, nor be affected by, the
climate of the study area. The Selected Action Alternative is not of a nature or scale to alter
existing climate patterns.

3.1.2 Soils
According to the Soil Surveys for the District of Columbia, there are eight soil associations in
the study area: Chillum-Urban Complex, Glenelg Variant, Manor Loam, Manor-Urban Land
Complex, Urban Land-Chillum Complex, Urban Land-Manor Complex, Udorthents, and
Urban Land (USDA, 1976). The predominant soil associations underlying the study area are
Manor-Urban Land Complex, Urban Land-Chillum Complex, and Urban Land-Manor Complex.
These soil associations are approximately 10 to 50 feet thick over metamorphic bedrock, and
have been disturbed by grading and construction of buildings. These soil associations are
moderately sloping, well drained, silty, and micaceous with a small amount of silty alluvium.

Page 38

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The permeability of these soil associations is between 0.6 and 2.0 inches per hour. There are no
hydric soils or soils with hydric inclusions in the study area.
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact the remaining undisturbed
soils in the study area as the areas of steep slopes would be protected from further development.

3.1.3 Geology
The study area is along the boundary between the Piedmont Physiographic Province on the
northwest and the Coastal Plain Physiographic Province on the southeast. Bedrock of the Laurel
Formation underlies the study area. The Laurel Formation is a gray, medium- to coarse-grained,
moderately to well-foliated muscovite-biotite-quartz schist and gneiss and contains garnets and
staurolite. Well records indicate that depth to bedrock is greater than 40 feet (Johnston, 1964).
The formation weathers to form deep clayey to silty residual soils. Drillability of the rock is
moderate. Overbreak of the rock during excavation is mostly moderate, but may be excessive
depending on the orientation of excavation to joint systems (USGS, 1967).
No unique engineering constraints to construction are posed by the bedrock geology.
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact the geology of the study area.
The Selected Action Alternative consists of the redevelopment of an urban area.

3.2

WATER RESOURCES

3.2.1 Surface Waters

The study area is in the drainage basin of Rock Creek (Exhibit 3.1). Rock Creek originates in
Montgomery County, Maryland, flows south through the District of Columbia, and discharges
to the Potomac River approximately five miles south of the study area. Surface runoff in the
study area is collected by overland flow and an extensive storm sewer system and is discharged
to Rock Creek.
The District of Columbia Department of the Environment (DDOE) groups waters into Beneficial
Use Classes. Rock Creek is classified as a Class B, C, D, and E stream. Class B waters are protected
for secondary contact recreation and aesthetic enjoyment; Class C waters are protected for fish,
shellfish, and wildlife; Class D waters are protected for human health related to consumption of
fish and shellfish; and Class E waters are protected for navigation (DC Municipal Regulations
and DC Register, 2010).
Rock Creek is designated as Special Waters of the District of Columbia (SWDC). Special waters
are those that are of water quality better than needed for the current use or have scenic or aesthetic
importance. The water quality in SWDC-designated segments of surface waters shall be maintained
at or above the current level by implementing the following: (a) existing nonpoint source discharges,
stormwater discharges and storm sewer discharges, to SWDC segment shall be controlled through
implementation of best management practices (BMPs) and regulator programs; (b) construction or

Page 39

Final Environmental Impact Statement

development projects in which a SWDC-designated segment is located, which may lead to pollution
of the water, shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis to ensure that there are no long-term adverse
water quality effects and that no impairment of the designated uses of the segment occurs; or (c)
short-term degradation of water quality in a SWDC segment due to construction projects may be
permitted provided that prior notice is given to the public and other local and federal government
agencies, and provided that the builder of the construction project submits a report to the DDOE
which summarizes the views, significant comments, criticisms and suggestions of the public
and other local and federal government agencies and sets forth the specific responses in terms
of modifications of the proposed action or an explanation for rejection of proposals made by the
public and other local and federal government agencies (DCWASA, 2013).
Section 303(d) of the federal Clean Water Act and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) implementing regulations direct each state to identify and list waters, known as water
quality limited segments, in which current required controls of a specified substance are inadequate
to achieve water quality standards. For each water quality limited segment, the state is to either
establish a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) of the specified substance that the waterbody
can receive without violating water quality standards, or demonstrate that water quality standards
are being met. Rock Creek is listed on the Section 303(d) list of impaired waters for 2010 and
has an established TMDL for bacteria and organics and metals (DCWASA, 2013).
Rock Creek’s water quality is impaired from sedimentation and other forms of non-point source
pollution and from limited point source pollutants within its highly urbanized watershed. Two
major sources of pollution are stormwater runoff and combined sewer overflows; 28 sewer
overflows drain directly into Rock Creek. Those 28 overflows discharge an estimated 52 million
gallons of untreated water into the creek every year, the majority of which comes from the large
combined sewer overflow outfall at Piney Branch. These discharges are a major source of damage
to Rock Creek. The District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority has a stormwater discharge
permit issued by the EPA for improving its stormwater management to improve water quality
in Rock Creek. In 2009, the District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority began replacing
portions of the combined sewer with separate storm sewers. The District's efforts to separate storm
drainage from sanitary effluent citywide, as well as nearby at Rock Creek has been a multi-year
effort, which continues. This process is assisted when partners upstream of impact areas, such as
Rock Creek, redevelop under new DC Stormwater Management Guidelines. (DCWASA, 2013).
The stormwater drainage system for the site of the former WRAMC and Selected Action
Alternative consists of catch basins, curb inlets, yard drains, manholes, sand filters, and 10- to
approximately 36-inch-diameter pipelines that discharge to the District of Columbia’s Luzon
Avenue storm drainage tunnel. The tunnel, which enters the site of the former WRAMC at
Georgia Avenue and Dahlia Street, runs southwest under the Rose Garden and discharges into
Rock Creek Park. Most of this piping is approaching its design life and increased maintenance
costs are anticipated under continued use. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007
requires federal agencies to provide national leadership to reduce water quality problems from
stormwater runoff. Section 438 specifically mentions that projects “….involving a federal facility
with a footprint that exceeds 5,000 square feet shall use site planning, design, construction, and

Page 40

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

maintenance strategies for the property to maintain or restore, to the maximum extent technically
feasible, the predevelopment hydrology of the property with regard to the temperature, rate,
volume, and duration of flow.”
The No Action Alternative would not impact surface waters.
The Selected Action Alternative would not impact surface waters. Although the FMC property
does not have a combined sewer system, it was built prior to citywide storm water regulations
being in place. Therefore, the property is one of several hundred which exacerbate the on-going
efforts downstream by having uncontrolled storm water runoff. This uncontrolled and undetained
runoff in cumulative from all watershed properties, overwhelms downstream infrastructure,
overflows, and becomes combined with sanitary effluent in severe rain events. The capture and
retention of storm water runoff within the FMC property would result in a beneficial impact to
surface waters by contributing to reducing the occurrence of these events.
The water quantity controls for the Selected Action Alternative would be in accordance with
Section 438 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 and the District of Columbia
Stormwater Management Guidelines, consisting of the 2013 DDOE Rule on Stormwater
Management and Soil Erosion and Sediment Control and the 2013 Stormwater Management
Guidebook. The District of Columbia Stormwater Guidebook requires all projects to meet the
following requirements:
1. Water quality volume to be captured and retained onsite for the first flush storm, a given
runoff depth dependent on the type of impervious coverage associated with the project.
For roadways this is 0.5 inch and for non-roadway impervious surfaces it is 0.3 inch.
2. The 2-year storm event peak discharge shall be controlled to be less than the predevelopment rate.
3. The 15-year storm event peak discharge shall be controlled to be less than the predevelopment rate.
These requirements meet and exceed the requirements of EISA Section 438.
The Selected Action Alternative would not be allowed to increase the peak rate of stormwater
runoff. The Selected Action Alternative would be required to reduce the developed peak flows to
predevelopment conditions through detention, reuse, and low impact development. DOS-controlled
infrastructure parcels (roadways and open spaces) shall establish a pre-development hydrologic
condition. DOS infrastructure upgrades shall include stormwater management to return the
post-developed hydrologic conditions to the pre-developed conditions through the use of several
decentralized low impact development facilities, including bioretention and streetscape filteration
inlets, as well as by reducing the impervious coverage to a minimum required.

Page 41

Final Environmental Impact Statement

The individual chancery parcels shall also be required to meet the DC Stormwater Management
requirements. Each parcel shall have a review of stormwater management during their
construction permitting phase to confirm adequate facilities have been implemented to reduce
the post-developed runoff condition to the pre-developed condition for their parcel.
As all individual parcels and common infrastructure shall be required to meet the DCSWM
requirements, the project as a whole shall attain compliance with the District’s requirements,
and therefore the EISA Section 438.
The DOS-controlled common areas to be developed would include stormwater management
capable of meeting requirements independently. To accommodate the infrastructure improvements
outside of individual lots (i.e., roads, walks, open space, etc.), detention/water quality improvement
areas would be designated adjacent to roads. Roadway runoff would be collected at appropriate
intervals along the gutter pan and directed to bioretention facilities (tree boxes) for cleaning and
disposal. In addition to the linear roadway system, the linear park along 14th Street would replace
the existing surface parking lot and provide an additional centralized area for the treatment of
stormwater runoff. The open space along 14th Street is designed as a large landscaped green area
and incorporates bioretention elements. The stormwater system for road infrastructure would
connect to the District of Columbia system.
With the incorporation of rainwater harvesting, the preservation of at least 250 trees on site, and
water quality improvement measures into the network, peak discharge quantities can be controlled
and managed to satisfy District regulations. Tree preservation credits would be from common
areas; individual parcels would not be permitted to account for any preserved trees within their lot.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, stormwater would be managed on-site at each individual
chancery and on the site as a whole, including potential gray water reuse and bioretention
gardens. Baseline stormwater flow at the FMC was estimated based on pre-development or
“meadow” condition:
◊

The existing site at meadow conditions (two-year design) would consist of an average
runoff Curve Number (CN) of 72, or 0.9 inch of runoff matching the overall site composite.

◊

The existing site at pre-project (15-year design) would consist of an average CN of 85,
or 3.5 inches of runoff matching the overall site composite.

◊

The existing site at pre-project (100-year design) would consist of an average CN of 85,
or 6.5 inches of runoff matching the overall site composite.

The above criteria would be used regardless of the exact existing conditions of any individual
parcel in order to ensure the campus would always remain in compliance with DDOE guidelines
for the total site. The chancery would either be required to provide additional stormwater
management controls or could receive relief to stormwater management controls (as compared
to the baseline requirements) by measuring the amount of impervious area created from their

Page 42

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

development in comparison to the baseline assumptions. Due to the incremental and flexible
design for each individual parcel, the specific post-construction coverage difference in impervious
surface from the existing cannot be determined for the master plan.
The stormwater management practices that would be implemented as part of the Selected Action
Alternative would have a long-term indirect beneficial impact on surface water by reducing
stormwater runoff, improving water quality, and helping to comply with the TMDLs established
for metals and bacteria.

3.2.2 Groundwater
Groundwater movement in the bedrock is primarily through secondary openings such as faults,
joints, and bedding and cleavage planes. The water table is generally less than 50 feet in depth
and unconfined. Well yields in the Laurel Formation range from 0.8 to 30 gallons per minute and
average 10 gallons per minute. The average well depth is 198 feet. There are no known private
well users in the study area (Johnston, 1964).
The No Action Alternative would not impact groundwater.
Implementation of the Selected Action Alternative could result in encounters with groundwater,
depending on the location of future construction and the design of the structure. U.S. Army Public
Health Command reported the results of groundwater sampling from monitoring wells in the vicinity
of the transformer vaults at the northwest corner of Building 40 and estimated the concentrations
of PCBs (concentrations less than the reporting limit of 0.5 microgram per liter (μg/L)) in some
samples. The estimated results may be false positives as they were not confirmed through use
of a second column in a gas chromatograph. The need for further groundwater sampling will be
determined by the DOS.
The depth to groundwater varies across the study area. Groundwater in monitoring wells installed
during the Building 40 Transformer Site investigation ranged from approximately 16.5 to 20 feet
below ground surface. An Army pre-remedial report for Building 15 (Boiler Plant), which is located
outside the study area, but on the former WRAMC campus, indicated groundwater in monitoring
wells ranged from approximately 8 to 19 feet below ground surface. If groundwater is expected to
be encountered during construction of buildings and related structures, the designs would address
the management of groundwater in accordance with District of Columbia and federal laws and
regulations.

3.2.3 Floodplains
Federal protection of floodplains is afforded by EO 11988, “Floodplain Management,” and
implemented under 44 CFR 9.00. These regulations direct federal agencies to undertake actions to
avoid impacts on floodplain areas by structures built in flood-prone areas. The Federal Emergency
Management Agency has primary responsibility for identifying flood-prone areas.

Page 43

Final Environmental Impact Statement

According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the western portion of the study area
along Rock Creek is prone to inundation by a 100-year flood (i.e., an area that has a one percent
chance of becoming inundated by peak flows during a given year) (Exhibit 3.1).
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact floodplains and would be
in compliance with EO 11988. The Selected Action Alternative does not propose to construct
structures in flood-prone areas.

3.3

VEGETATION

The study area has a diversity of vegetation. A detailed tree inventory of the area potentially
affected by the Selected Action Alternative was performed in late winter of 2013 and approximately
560 trees were identified within the FMC boundary. The tree sizes were recorded by diameter
at breast height (dbh) measured 4.5 feet above the ground (Exhibit 3.3).
The removal of trees in the District of Columbia is regulated by the Urban Forest Preservation
Act of 2002. The act was passed by the Council of the District of Columbia and is administered
by the DDOT through its Urban Forestry Administration. The purpose of the act is to protect the
District of Columbia urban forest on both public and private land. Trees with a circumference
of 55 inches or more are classed as Special Trees. Special Trees cannot be cut down, topped or
destroyed without a permit issued by the mayor’s office and mitigated using one of two options
(DDOT, 2013):
1. Replacement trees using the formula:
Inches of circumference ÷ 3.14(pi) = Inches in diameter
Inches in diameter ÷ 2 inches = number of 2-inch caliper replacement trees
2. Monetary payment to the Tree Fund of $35 per inch of circumference.
In addition to this regulation, in 2016, the District passed Zoning Act 31-386, which defines a
tree that is 100 inches or greater in circumference as a Heritage Tree. Per this act, Heritage Trees
may not be removed unless one of the following conditions apply:
1. The tree is in poor condition and may be a hazard.
2. The tree is an invasive species as identified by the Urban Forestry Administration.
The penalty for removing a Heritage Tree is a fine of no less than $300 per each inch of the
circumference of the Heritage Tree in question.
The regulation requires that an International Society of Arboriculture Certified Arborist inspects
each tree and makes a determination as to the quality of the tree. Trees designated as hazardous
or in poor quality do not typically need to be mitigated. As a federal agency, DOS is not required
to comply with District of Columbia regulations; however, DOS will emphasize retaining the tree

Page 44

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.3 - Existing Trees
Legend
Project Area Boundary
Projected Lot Boundaries
Heritage Tree Critical
Root Zone
Non-Heritage Tree Critical
Root Zone

X

Existing Tree in Poor Condition
or Undesirable Species
50-foot Vegetated Buﬀer Zone

N

0’

90’

180’

Page 45

Final Environmental Impact Statement

canopy in the development of the site. Approximately 84 trees inventoried qualify as Heritage
Trees by their size, and 226 trees qualify as Special Trees.
The wooded areas are second growth forests, as original forest no longer exists. These areas
contain vegetation common to the region and are predominantly composed of mature Oak and
Tulip Poplar trees. Many of them are more than 100 years old and measure 50 inches in dbh
(Exhibit 3.3). Native trees consist of Red Oak, Tulip Poplar, Red Maple, American Elm, American
Holly, Black Walnut, Black Cherry, Hickory, and Southern Magnolia.
The understory in the wooded areas consists of shrubs, poor quality turf, and dense patches of
invasive species. Frequently encountered invasive species are English Ivy, Winged Euonymus,
Norway Maple, and Mock Orange. None of these areas contain native understory; only the
overstory is characteristic of a native canopy and forest cover.
The eastern portion of the area potentially affected by the Selected Action Alternative is maintained
landscape. While the majority of this vegetation has been planted within the last 20 years, a
few areas of mature vegetation remain. Consistent with practices of the International Society of
Aboriculture, the tree inventory did not identify individual trees in this area less than 8-inch dbh.
Species in this area consist of Red Maple, Kousa Dogwood, London Plane Tree, American Holly,
American Linden, Pin Oak, Willow Oak, Loblolly Pine, Bradford Pear, and Kwanzan Cherry.
Along areas of the western and northern perimeters of the area potentially affected by the
Selected Action Alternative, evergreen species have been planted for screening. The evergreen
species are predominantly Eastern Hemlock trees but also consist of Leyland Cypress, Black
Pine, and Eastern White Pine.
The No Action Alternative would not impact vegetation.
The Selected Action Alternative would impact vegetation by removing some existing trees,
including Heritage and Special Trees. The impact to trees would be minimized by maintaining
a 50-foot wide vegetative buffer along Alaska Avenue, Fern Street, and 16th Street. DOS would
retain all trees in fair to excellent condition, including Heritage and Special Trees, within the
buffer zone and the public open space. Approximately 15 of the 84 Heritage Trees and 47 of the
226 Special Trees inventoried across the site were designated as poor to very poor condition and
would be removed. On the DOS-controlled portion of the site, if a poor to very poor Heritage
or Special Tree is removed, replacement trees would be planted along streets and within the
vegetative buffer to offset the loss at the ratio defined in the DDOT guidance. DOS would use a
licensed arborist to identify necessary tree removals, protected trees, and to supervise new tree
planting on the property. District statutes and Sustainable DC goals would be used as a general
framework for tree management on the site.
Heritage Trees and their associated critical root-zone will be identified by DOS for each chancery
lot (Exhibit 3.3). DOS would encourage foreign missions, through lot development guidelines and
lease agreements, to protect, and if needed, replace Heritage and Special Trees in accordance with

Page 46

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

the intent of the Urban Forest Preservation Act. Requirements and guidelines for retaining the
tree canopy on chancery parcels are included in the FMC design guidelines that are supplemental
to the lease agreement between DOS and the respective chanceries (Appendix C).
The Selected Action Alternative would affect vegetation by removing maintained landscape,
and understory dominated by invasive species. Landscape guidelines for the DOS- and foreign
mission-controlled portions of the site include the recommendation to use native or adapted
species. The Selected Action Alternative master plan design guidelines require each street within
the FMC to be lined with trees from the DDOT’s Urban Forestry Administration recommended
tree list (Appendix C). The trees will be located in tree boxes that would include bioretention
elements in support of the stormwater management plan for DOS common areas.

3.4

WILDLIFE

Wildlife in the study area is limited to those species adapted to living in an urban environment.
Species of birds typical of urban settings consist of the House Sparrow, Bluejay, European
Starling, Northern Cardinal, Common Crow, Gray Catbird, Mockingbird, Mourning Dove, and
pigeon. Mammal species common to urban environments consist of the White-tailed deer, Red
Fox, Eastern Gray squirrel, mice, rats, opossum, and raccoons.
The No Action Alternative would not impact wildlife. The Selected Action Alternative would not
permanently impact wildlife because it consists of the redevelopment of an urban site. Species
found in the study area are adapted to the urban environment. Some wildlife may be temporarily
displaced by construction activities.

3.5 THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES AND
SPECIES OF CONSERVATION CONCERN
The ESA of 1973, as amended, provides protection for those species that are listed as endangered
or threatened under the ESA. The ESA grants the USFWS prime responsibility in administering
the species designations and protections granted under the act. “Endangered” means that a species
is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range. “Threatened” means
that a species is likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future.
“Critical habitat” is a term defined and used in the ESA to designate a specific geographic area(s)
that is essential for the conservation of a threatened or endangered species and that may require
special management and protection. Critical habitat may include an area that is not currently
occupied by the species but would be needed for its recovery.
The Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 668-668c) enacted in 1940 protects bald and
golden eagles. The act prohibits anyone, without a permit issued by the Secretary of the Interior,
from “taking” bald and golden eagles, including their parts, nests, or eggs. The act defines take as
“pursue, shoot, shoot at, poison, wound, kill, capture, trap, collect, molest, or disturb.” According to
the USFWS, bald eagles have the potential to occur within the study area. In addition to immediate

Page 47

Final Environmental Impact Statement

impacts, this definition covers impacts that result from human-induced alterations initiated around
a previously used nest site during a time when eagles are not present if, on the eagle’s return, such
alterations agitate or bother an eagle to a degree that interferes with or interrupts normal breeding,
feeding, or sheltering habits and causes injury, death, or nest abandonment (USFWS, 2013).
According to the USFWS, the Hay’s Spring amphipod is listed as endangered in the District of
Columbia (USFWS, 2017). The Hay’s Spring amphipod is a federally endangered species that is
endemic to the springs of Rock Creek Park. There is little known about the biology, population
dynamics, or ecological community of this amphipod. It spends its life in a shallow groundwater
zone, moving in water that percolates among sand grains and gravel until it is flushed out by
large volumes of water into a spring.
According to the DDOE, there are no threatened or endangered species, and no ecologically
sensitive habitats in the study area (DDOE, 2012).
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact threatened and endangered
species, species of conservation concern, protected species, or critical habitat (USFWS, 2013;
DDOE, 2012).

3.6

TRANSPORTATION

3.6.1 Vehicle Traffic
A Draft Transportation Impact Study (Gorove/Slade, 2014) was conducted to review the existing
transportation elements surrounding the project study area. This study, in conjunction with
a Comprehensive Transportation Review (Gorove/Slade, 2017), evaluated the impacts the
proposed project would have on the surrounding transportation network. The cul-de-sac street
layout option at 14th Street and Alaska Avenue was used to assess transportation impacts, as it
was considered the most severe scenario for potential impacts at intersections.

3.6.1.1

Streets

The streets in the study area are designed as a grid pattern, with a few roads that bisect the
network diagonally. Intersections are at regular intervals and most streets in the study area provide
two-way travel. The street network provides good traffic circulation throughout the study area,
allowing for multiple routing options for drivers and dispersing vehicles.
The primary streets in the study area:
Two-lane 13th Street is a north-south local road that is bisected by the former WRAMC, connecting
with Fern Street to the north and Aspen Street to the south. Average daily traffic volumes for 13th
Street are not available. Limited parking is available along both sides of the street.
Two-lane 14th Street is a north-south road that ends at Aspen Street and restarts at Main Drive.
South of Aspen Street, 14th Street is classified as a minor arterial with a dedicated bicycle
lane in each travel direction. Average daily traffic volumes along this portion of 14th Street

Page 48

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

are approximately 8,800 vehicles per day southbound. North of Alaska Avenue, 14th Street is
a two-lane local road with an average daily traffic volume of 2,700 vehicles. A portion of 14th
Street south of Alaska Avenue traverses the former WRAMC to Main Drive.
Four-lane 16th Street is a north-south principal arterial that borders a portion of the western
edge of the former WRAMC. It has an average daily traffic volume of 30,600 vehicles per day
north of Alaska Avenue. It has a median, which is converted into center left-turn lanes at several
intersections. Limited parking is available along both sides of the street, although parking is
generally prohibited during peak hours.
Alaska Avenue is a four-lane northeast-southwest principal arterial that borders the northwestern
edge of the former WRAMC. It has an average daily traffic volume of 3,700 vehicles per day
east of 16th Street. Limited parking is available along both sides of the street.
Aspen Street is a two-lane east-west road that borders the southern edge of the former WRAMC.
West of Georgia Avenue, Aspen Street is classified as a minor arterial with an average daily
traffic volume of 4,700 vehicles per day near its intersection with 16th Street. East of Georgia
Avenue, the street is classified as a minor arterial with an average daily traffic volume of 3,600
vehicles. On-street parking is available along both sides of Aspen Street.
Dahlia Street is a two-lane east-west local road that runs through the former WRAMC. It has
an average daily traffic volume of 2,200 vehicles east of Piney Branch Road. Limited parking
is available along both sides of the street.
Fern Street is a two-lane east-west local road that borders the northern edge of the former
WRAMC. It has an average daily traffic volume of 2,200 vehicles near its intersection with 16th
Street and 1,000 vehicles per day near its intersection with Georgia Avenue. Limited parking is
available along both sides of the street.
Georgia Avenue is a four-lane north-south principal arterial that borders the eastern edge of
the former WRAMC. It has an average daily traffic volume of 21,000 vehicles north of Aspen
Street. Georgia Avenue has a wide right-most lane to accommodate heavy vehicle traffic along
the corridor. Limited parking is available along both sides of the street, but parking is generally
prohibited at these locations during peak hours.
Luzon Avenue is a two-lane northeast-southwest local road in the southern part of the study area.
Average daily traffic volumes for Luzon Street are not available. Limited parking is available
along both sides of the street.
Access to the former WRAMC was provided through gates; several of these gates have been
closed following the relocation of the WRAMC. Currently, only the gate at 16th Street and Main
Drive is operational and provides access to the remaining on-site uses.

Page 49

Final Environmental Impact Statement

On-street parking is provided throughout the study area along all streets. Most parking spaces
require residential parking permits, though some spaces are metered or unregulated. Other
on-street parking is generally prohibited during peak periods (typically 7:00 to 9:30 a.m. and
4:00 to 6:30 p.m.), but unregulated during off-peak periods.
The No Action Alternative would not impact parking.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, public access would be maintained along streets within the
FMC except in limited instances where security requires the need for temporary closures (such as
national emergencies). DOS would define a process and establish thresholds for security-related
street closures.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, the primary vehicle entrance for the FMC would be at the
intersection of Main Drive and 14th Street. Secondary entrance would be at the intersection of
Alaska Avenue and Dahlia Street and at Dahlia Street. The proposed access points correspond to
previously used, and now closed, access locations from the former WRAMC. The Dahlia Street
access point at Alaska Avenue was closed by the Army in 2001, but the plan proposes that this
be reopened. The driveways would be stop controlled. A DDOT permit would be required to
connect the FMC to the District’s road network.
The FMC would intersect the DC-LRA at two locations: on Dahlia Street and at the oval on Main
Drive. The FMC cross-section would be coordinated with the DC-LRA cross-section on Dahlia
Street, except that the FMC section would not have on-street parking. The bike lanes and travel
lanes would be seamless along Dahlia Street. The intersection of 14th Street and Main Drive
would provide vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation to flow to and from 14th Street and
Main Drive.
Access points where bus service is anticipated would be designed to Washington Metropolitan
Area Transit Authority (WMATA) guidelines.
Vehicular site access to each chancery would be designed to meet DDOT standards as described
in the design guidelines (Appendix C). Parcels with access to the FMC street network would
provide vehicular access and not from a public street. Curb cuts from a public street would be
required to be at least 60 feet from an existing or proposed intersection, 32 feet from adjacent
curb cuts, and between 10-14 feet wide for one-way circulation or 20-24 feet wide for two-way
circulation. No truck backing maneuvers would be permitted across a public sidewalk.
Each chancery would be required to provide a Transportation Management Plan (TMP) to
be reviewed by DDOT during chancery design. It is encouraged that the TMP be reviewed
prior to beginning the formal design review process with NCPC. The TMP would include
Transportation Demand Management (TDM) elements to recommend to chanceries to promote
non-auto travel. TDM is the application of policies and strategies used to reduce travel demand
or to redistribute demand to other times, spaces, or modes. TDM typically focuses on reducing
the demand of single-occupancy private vehicles during peak period travel times or on shifting

Page 50

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

single-occupancy vehicular demand to off-peak periods or other modes of transportation. The
implementation of TDM strategies for each parcel would be dependent on the needs and policies
of the foreign government lessee. DOS would coordinate with DDOT to develop an acceptable
list of chancery-level TDM elements. TDM planning would strongly consider the use of public
and alternative transportation elements for chancery staff to reduce vehicle trips to and from the
FMC. TDM studies would include regularly scheduled deliveries (i.e., office supplies, special
package deliveries, postal service, and event catering) and waste removal. If it is anticipated
that the chancery may be used for the occasional special event, TDM studies would include
strategies and recommendations for event parking.
The Selected Action Alternative would require that chancery parking (employees, visitors, and
delivery vehicles) be contained within the confines of each chancery property. Each foreign
mission would be required to meet 100 percent of its parking needs within its lot at time of
occupancy and at 10 years after occupancy. The projected number of employees was calculated
using the estimated maximum building square footage (approximately 920,000 sq. ft.). It was
estimated that there would be one employee per 500 square feet and that for every employee,
1.05 parking spaces would be provided. In addition, visitor parking was included based on five
percent of the employee parking. Therefore, the planned number of parking spaces reflects the
maximum number of projected parking spaces to be constructed on-site. Through the TMP,
chanceries would be encouraged to limit on-site parking needs and to use public transportation.
The FMC Master Plan specifies that the majority of parking be provided in below-grade lots.
Existing buildings that are reused would be required to develop independent below-grade
parking solutions and new buildings would need to incorporate parking within their lot in
below-grade structures. Under the Selected Action Alternative, on-street parking within internal
FMC roadways would not be permitted. Current parking allowances on internal FMC roadways
would be removed upon implementation of the Selected Action Alternative. The parking garage
associated with the CNMC exceeds the parking needs of the CNMC; therefore, excess parking
spaces within the existing garage may be an option for additional parking.

3.6.1.2

Existing and Projected Demand

The existing conditions in and around the former WRAMC were characterized to provide a
foundation for assessing the transportation implications of the Selected Action Alternative. This
was determined by examining the peak traffic hours. The “peak hour” represents the worst-case
scenario, when the system traffic volumes are the highest. The use of a typical weekday morning
and afternoon peak hours are used to ensure that conclusions regarding adverse impacts and
their respective mitigation measures would apply to the vast majority of time roads are used.
Traffic counts were conducted at 13 intersections between the hours of 6:30 and 9:30 a.m.
and between 4:00 and 7:00 p.m. on Tuesday and Wednesday, December 6–7, 2011. Traffic
counts were also collected on Tuesday and Wednesday, June 5–6, 2012 (Gorove/Slade, 2014).
Additional traffic volumes were collected on Tuesday, March 1, 2016 and Tuesday, April 5,
2016, and are comprised of turning movement count data. Each of these count dates represents
typical weekdays when the District of Columbia public school systems were in session. These

Page 51

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.4 - Existing Traffic Conditions

Page 52

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

typical weekdays represent time periods that include normal operation for other major traffic
generators in the study area (Exhibit 3.4).
The No Action Alternative includes the traffic generated by other developments near the study
area and inherent growth on the roads. Growth from these two sources was added to the existing
traffic volumes to determine the traffic projections for the future No Action Alternative.
The DC-LRA development would generate approximately 1,918 and 2,198 trips during the
morning and afternoon peak hours, respectively (Exhibit 3.5). Other developments near the
former WRAMC that would be completed by 2032 consist of:
◊

CNMC Walter Reed Facility

◊

7200 Georgia Avenue NW

The 7200 Georgia Avenue NW will include 100 multifamily residential units. This development
is currently under construction and will be completed prior to the FMC development.
Trips generated by the other developments were estimated using the methodology outlined in Institute
of Transportation Engineers’ Trip Generation, 9th Edition. In addition to the other developments, other
traffic increases due to inherent growth on the streets were accounted for with a 0.5 percent per year
growth rate compounded annually. This rate was estimated based on a comparison between existing
and past average annual weekday traffic volumes obtained from DDOT for 2006–2009. This growth
rate was applied to streets and intersections, with the exception of turning movements entering and
exiting the former WRAMC at the intersection of 16th Street and Main Drive.
Trip generation for the chanceries was estimated based on existing traffic volumes collected
adjacent to the ICC. The FMC would be designed similarly to the ICC, therefore, traffic data are
comparable. Traffic data were collected on March 19, 2014, between 6:30 and 9:30 a.m. and 4:00
and 7:00 p.m. at two intersections at the ICC, as well as adjacent streets. In addition, intersections
adjacent to the former WRAMC were counted (7:45 to 8:45 a.m. and 5:30 to 6:30 p.m.).
The traffic volumes generated by other developments and the inherent growth were added to the
existing (2014) traffic volumes to establish the future (2032) traffic volumes for the No Action
Alternative (Exhibit 3.6).

Exhibit 3.5 - Other Developments Trip Generation Rate and Projection
Land Use
DC-LRA Reuse Plan
CNMC
7200 Georgia Ave.
Total Vehicular Trips

Trip Generation
A.M. Peak Hours (vehicles/hr)
P.M. Peak Hours (vehicles/hr)
In
Out
Total
In
Out
Total
1,201

717

1,918

942

1,256

2,198

148

30

178

21

150

171

6

26

32

28

15

43

1,355

773

2,128

991

1,421

2,412

Page 53

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.6 - No Action Future Traffic Volumes (2032)

Page 54

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Due to the ICC’s proximity to the Van Ness–UDC Metrorail Station (one quarter to one half
of a mile, depending on the chancery), it is likely that a significant number of trips occur via
transit. As transit ridership information is not available for the ICC, data were obtained from the
WMATA Ridership Survey. It is anticipated that the mode split of the chanceries would operate
similar to an office development. As a result, the commute mode share at office sites as listed
in the WMATA study was used. However, no office sites reviewed in the WMATA Ridership
Survey are near the Van Ness–UDC Metrorail station, so comparable data from two office sites
near the Friendship Heights Metrorail Station were selected.
Based on office sites in the WMATA Ridership Survey, it was estimated that the ICC would
have an automobile mode share of 57 percent, which was used to extrapolate the total number
of trips generated by the ICC. Based on this mode share, the total number of trips generated by
the ICC was calculated to be approximately 747 inbound and 121 outbound (868 total) during
the morning peak hour and 100 inbound and 630 outbound (730 total) during the afternoon peak
hour, without transit use.
Observations taken into consideration, requiring adjustments to trip generation numbers at the
ICC, included the following: 1) chancery use generates a peak period that occurs later during
the morning and earlier during the afternoon than the typical “rush hour”; 2) field observations
were conducted to determine the location of unrestricted parking in the vicinity of the ICC, which
influences the number of trips counted that were not associated with the ICC; 3) a ridership
survey was conducted to determine the number of vehicles compared to non-auto trips to the ICC;
and 4) the trips generated for the ICC were used to project the trips generated by the proposed
FMC based on building square footage (SF). The total number of trips generated by the ICC
was grown based on a ratio of the total SF of the FMC (approximately 920,000 SF) to the total
SF of the ICC (approximately 1.1 million SF). This adjusted calculation yielded approximately
624 inbound and 101 outbound trips during the morning peak hour, and 84 inbound and 526
outbound trips during the afternoon peak hour for the FMC without any credit for transit usage
(Gorove/Slade, 2017) (Exhibits 3.7 and 3.8).

Exhibit 3.7 - Selected Action Alternative Trip Generation Rate and Projection
Step

Calculation

Trip Generation
A.M. Peak Hours
P.M. Peak Hours
In
Out
Total
In
Out Total

ICC peak hour vehicular trips

Summed on G/S count

396

69

465

57

329

386

Adjustment for unrestricted on-street
parking

30% of 89 unrestricted
on-street spaces near ICC

30

0

30

0

30

30

Adjusted existing ICC vehicular trips

Added existing volumes and
on-street parking

426

69

495

57

359

416

Estimated ICC total peak hour trips,
without transit usage

Increased based on auto
mode-share of 57%

747

121

868

100

630

730

Projected FMC total peak hour trips

Calculated based on ratio of
square footage (0.92/1.1 M SF)

624

101

725

84

526

609

624

101

725

84

526

609

Total Vehicular Trips

Page 55

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.8 - Selected Action Alternative Generated Traffic Volumes (2032)

Page 56

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Existing traffic volumes and travel patterns were analyzed to determine the trip distribution
for the trips added by the Selected Action Alternative. The traffic volumes for the Selected
Action Alternative were calculated by adding the development-generated traffic volumes to
the future (2032) for the No Action Alternative. Thus, the future condition for the Selected
Action Alternative includes traffic generated by existing volumes, the growth percentage, other
development, and the proposed action (Exhibit 3.9).
A software program (Synchro Version 9.0) was used to analyze the intersections in the study area.
The results of the capacity analyses are expressed in level of service (LOS) and delay (seconds per
vehicle) for each approach. LOS is a letter grade assessed, with A being the best and F being the worst.
The capacity analyses were based on: 1) peak hour traffic volumes; 2) lane use and traffic controls;
and 3) Highway Capacity Manual methodologies (using Synchro 9 software). The average delay
of each approach and LOS is shown for signalized intersections in addition to the overall average
delay. The Highway Capacity Manual does not give guidelines for calculating the average delay for
a two-way stop-controlled intersection, as the approaches without stop signs would technically have
no delay (Exhibit 3.10).
The Selected Action Alternative was considered to have an impact at an intersection if the capacity
analyses showed a LOS E or F at an intersection or along an approach with the proposed action,
where one does not exist in the future conditions for the No Action Alternative. Based on these
criteria, the following intersections will be impacted by the FMC development:
◊

16th Street & Alaska Avenue

◊

16th Street & Aspen Street

◊

16th Street & Main Drive

◊

Georgia Avenue & Butternut Street

◊

Georgia Avenue & Dahlia Street

◊

Dahlia Street & Alaska Avenue

Exhibit 3.11 summarizes the results of the capacity analyses for those locations and scenarios
with considerable delays (Level E or F), and presents mitigation measures to improve the
intersection function and capacity to accommodate the Selected Action Alternative, while
minimizing impacts. In most situations, measures consisted of retiming of traffic signals and/
or adding a turning lane.

Page 57

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.9 - Selected Action Alternative Future Traffic Volumes (2032)

Page 58

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.10 - Peak Traffic Delays (in seconds)
Existing Conditions (2012)
Intersection

1. Fern St. & Alaska Ave.
2. Alaska Ave. & 14th St.
3. Dahlia St. & Alaska Ave.

4. 16th St. & Alaska Ave.

5. 16th St. & Main Dr.

6. 16th St. & Aspen St./Sherrill Dr.

7. 14th St. & Aspen St.

Approach

A.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

No Action Conditions (2032)
A.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

Selected Action Alternative
Conditions (2032)
A.M. Peak
P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS
Delay
LOS

Westbound

12.1

B

12.2

B

12.7

B

13.3

B

13.0

B

13.8

B

Southbound left

0.2

A

0.2

A

0.2

A

0.2

A

0.2

A

0.2

A

Eastbound left

1.5

A

1.0

A

1.5

A

1.0

A

1.8

A

1.9

A

Southbound

12.2

B

10.7

B

12.9

B

11.6

B

15.9

C

12.1

B

Westbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

15.2

C

18.5

C

28.0

D

41.5

E

Southbound Left

0.0

A

0.0

A

0.0

A

0.0

A

3.0

A

0.6

A

Overall

13.7

B

13.9

B

14.6

B

12.4

B

15.5

B

13.4

B

Westbound

53.3

D

45.0

D

66.0

E

50.2

D

71.9

E

59.7

E

Northbound

15.4

B

12.8

B

12.2

B

6.3

B

11.7

B

4.2

B

Southbound

2.7

A

10.1

B

2.6

A

12.8

B

2.9

A

12.8

B

Overall

0.8

A

0.6

A

15.2

B

11.4

B

19.6

B

24.3

C

Westbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

51.3

D

53.8

D

52.3

D

60.1

E

Northbound

0.2

A

0.7

A

1.5

A

14.8

B

2.0

A

34.5

C

Southbound

1.1

A

0.5

A

19.9

C

3.2

A

26.8

C

4.9

A

Overall

27.1

C

69.4

E

21.2

C

26.5

C

23.6

C

27.8

C

Eastbound

59.0

E

871.1

F

151.8

F

158.4

F

214.5

F

163.4

F

Westbound

196.3

F

127.2

F

87.4

F

110.8

F

87.0

F

114.9

F

Northbound

7.2

A

9.4

A

11.3

B

11.1

B

13.2

B

11.3

B

Southbound

7.9

A

5.9

A

9.1

A

8.4

A

10.0

B

11.5

B

Overall

9.6

A

8.9

A

14.0

B

11.8

B

14.4

B

12.1

B

Eastbound

8.0

A

9.0

A

9.3

A

11.6

B

9.4

A

12.1

B

Westbound

10.4

B

8.6

A

16.8

C

11.7

B

17.4

C

11.9

B

Northbound

8.6

A

9.0

A

10.0

B

12.0

B

10.2

B

12.2

B

Continued on following page

Page 59

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.10 - Peak Traffic Delays (in seconds) (Continued)
Existing Conditions (2012)
Intersection

8. Aspen St. & Luzon St./Site Driveway

9. 13th St. & Aspen St.

Approach

11. Georgia Ave. & Butternut St./Site Driveway

12. Georgia Ave. & Dahlia St. /Site Driveway

P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

A.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

Selected Action Alternative
Conditions (2032)
A.M. Peak
P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS
Delay
LOS

Overall

11.1

B

8.8

A

16.0

C

11.5

B

17.7

C

12.1

B

Eastbound

8.0

A

9.3

A

9.3

A

12.9

B

9.5

A

13.9

B

Westbound

12.0

B

8.8

A

19.2

C

11.1

B

21.7

C

11.5

B

Northbound

7.9

A

8.2

A

9.1

A

10.4

B

9.4

A

10.7

B

Southbound

-

-

-

-

9.1

A

9.4

A

9.3

A

9.9

A

Eastbound Left

-

-

-

-

1.7

A

1.2

A

1.7

A

1.1

A

Westbound left

0.3

A

0.8

A

0.3

A

0.7

A

0.3

A

0.7

A

Northbound

11.9

B

11.6

B

26.4

D

20.8

C

32.9

D

22.2

C

Southbound

10. Georgia Ave. & Aspen St.

A.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

No Action Conditions (2032)

-

-

-

-

22.3

C

17.6

C

23.0

C

18.3

C

Overall

12.6

B

32.4

C

16.9

B

19.9

B

18.1

B

20.4

C

Eastbound

57.7

E

147.2

F

65.5

E

71.9

E

69.6

E

72.0

E

Westbound

57.8

E

39.6

D

69.8

E

43.7

D

75.0

E

43.3

D

Northbound

5.8

A

11.1

B

8.4

A

10.3

B

9.5

A

10.8

B

Southbound

3.2

A

3.6

A

6.7

A

7.6

A

6.9

A

8.6

A

Overall

13.7

B

13.4

B

21.4

C

16.3

B

25.3

C

16.3

B

Eastbound

36.2

D

33.8

C

40.8

D

35.9

D

42.8

D

36.8

D

Westbound

65.7

E

37.5

D

118.9

F

42.0

D

130.1

F

42.2

D

Northbound

4.8

A

10.1

B

15.0

B

11.9

B

25.1

C

11.7

B

Southbound

8.2

A

13.8

B

4.5

A

14.0

B

3.4

A

14.0

B

Overall

3.3

A

2.6

A

8.0

A

8.3

A

16.2

B

11.1

B

Eastbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

44.8

D

57.2

E

43.2

D

58.4

E

Westbound

53.9

D

56.2

E

60.5

E

50.4

D

68.2

E

44.5

D

Northbound

2.2

A

0.8

A

5.9

A

1.7

A

24.8

C

2.5

A

Southbound

1.4

A

3.7

A

2.1

A

3.8

A

3.5

A

5.1

A

Continued on following page

Page 60

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.10 - Peak Traffic Delays (in seconds) (Continued)
Existing Conditions (2012)
Intersection

13. Georgia Ave. & Elder St. /Site Driveway

Approach

15. 14th St. and Dahlia St.

16. Main Dr. & 14th St.

P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

A.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

Selected Action Alternative
Conditions (2032)
A.M. Peak
P.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS
Delay
LOS

Overall

2.7

A

1.7

A

4.9

A

6.2

A

5.6

A

8.1

A

Eastbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

52.0

D

69.3

E

52.1

D

75.3

E

Westbound

54.6

D

57.3

E

53.9

D

45.8

D

54.3

D

43.5

D

Northbound

2.0

A

0.9

A

3.3

A

1.8

A

4.4

A

2.3

A

Southbound

2.0

A

1.8

A

2.5

A

2.2

A

3.0

A

3.2

A

-

-

-

-

4.2

A

6.6

A

4.3

A

6.8

A

Eastbound

13.1

B

12.3

B

38.6

D

48.6

D

38.2

D

49.7

D

Northbound

1.2

A

0.9

A

5.1

A

6.7

A

4.7

A

6.7

A

Southbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

1.3

A

2.0

A

1.7

A

2.0

A

Overall

0.0

A

0.0

A

7.4

A

7.8

A

8.6

A

9.2

A

Eastbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

7.5

A

7.6

A

8.7

A

8.6

A

Westbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

7.5

A

7.9

A

8.7

A

9.8

A

Northbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

6.8

A

6.9

A

7.8

A

8.1

A

Southbound

0.0

A

0.0

A

0.0

A

0.0

A

7.8

A

8.1

A

Overall

0.0

A

0.0

A

5.1

A

4.6

A

6.1

A

5.0

A

Eastbound

3.2

A

3.2

A

5.1

A

4.6

A

6.0

A

5.0

A

Westbound

3.2

A

3.2

A

5.1

A

4.6

A

6.3

A

4.8

A

Southbound

3.2

A

3.2

A

4.0

A

4.3

A

4.6

A

5.5

A

Overall
14. Georgia Ave. & Fern St.

A.M. Peak
Hour Delay
Delay
LOS

No Action Conditions (2032)

Page 61

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.11 - Road Capacity and Mitigation Measures under the Selected Action Alternative
Intersection

Locations & Scenarios with
LOS E or LOS F

Percent Future
Vehicular Traffic
Attributable to
Development
(in TF scenario)

Discussion, Recommendations, and Mitigation Measures

A.M.
Peak

P.M.
Peak

24.5%

20.7%

The westbound delay at this intersection is primarily due to the site-generated trips.

4.0%

The westbound delays at this intersection are primarily due to the addition of trips generated by both
the background developments and the proposed FMC in conjunction with the limited amount of green
time given to the westbound approach. By shifting some green time to Alaska Avenue, the westbound
approach operates under acceptable conditions without degrading the operations along 16th Street.
The District of Columbia and DOS would coordinate the retiming of the signal to ensure the most
efficient operation in the future. Also, should the northbound right turn lane along 16th Street at
Alaska Avenue that is planned for implementation as a part of the DC-LRA not be in place by the
time the FMC is 50 percent built out, DOS would construct this improvement.

4.8%

The westbound delays during the P.M. peak hour at this intersection are minimally increased from an
acceptable LOS of “D” to an unacceptable LOS of “E” due to the addition of site traffic and the existing
signal timings that prioritize through traffic along 16th Street. Restriping the westbound approach of
Main Drive as one left-turn lane and one shared left- and right-turn lane allows the signal to operate under
acceptable conditions during the morning and afternoon peak hours; however, the overall traffic volumes
associated with these turns as well as the potential for turning vehicles to conflict with pedestrians make
this improvement less than desirable. The District of Columbia, the developer of the DC-LRA site,
and DOS would coordinate to monitor the operation of the intersection to ensure the most efficient
operation in the future following the construction of the FMC. Also, should the westbound right-turn
lane along Main Drive at 16th Street that is planned for implementation as a part of the DC-LRA
not be in place by the time the FMC is 50 percent built out, DOS would construct this improvement.

4.1%

The eastbound and westbound delays at this intersection are due to the existing signal timings and lane
configurations. While the addition of the background growth and trips generated by the background
developments exacerbates the existing failing operation, the infrastructure improvements included in
the DC-LRA Master Plan improve the overall operation of the intersection. However, the eastbound and
westbound approaches still operate under unacceptable conditions during the morning and afternoon
peak period, which is exacerbated by the addition of the site-generated trips. Adjusting the signal
timings during the morning and afternoon peak periods helps decrease delay along the eastbound and
westbound approaches, but not without causing detrimental impacts to the 16th Street approaches,
particularly during the morning peak hour. DOS would coordinate with DDOT on signal timings to
ensure the most efficient operation in the future following the development of the FMC. To mitigate
this impact, DOS would encourage a reduction in auto mode travel by funding the installation and
first year’s operation expenses of a new 19-dock Capital Bikeshare station on the FMC property.
DOS would also fund the installation and first year's operating expenses for a second Capital
Bikeshare station at the Takoma Metrorail station or in the adjacent neighborhood.

Adjacent to the former WRAMC
3. Dahlia St. & Alaska Ave. WB Alaska Avenue P.M. Peak: TF

4. 16th St. & Alaska Ave.

5. 16th St. & Main Dr.

6. 16th St. & Aspen St./
Sherrill Dr.

WB Alaska A.M. Peak: BG, TF
WB Alaska P.M. Peak: TF

WB Main P.M. Peak: TF

Overall Intersection P.M. Peak: EX
EB Sherrill A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
EB Sherrill P.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
WB Aspen A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
WB Aspen P.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF

3.5%

5.4%

4.2%

Continued on following page

Page 62

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.11 - Road Capacity and Mitigation Measures Under the Selected Action Alternative (Continued)

Intersection

Locations & Scenarios with
LOS E or LOS F

Percent Future
Vehicular Traffic
Attributable to
Development
(in TF scenario)

A.M.
Peak

10. Georgia Ave. & Aspen
EB Aspen A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
St.

11. Georgia Ave. &
Butternut St.

12. Georgia Ave. &
Dahlia St.

WB Butternut A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF

EB Dahlia P.M. Peak: BG, TF
WB Dahlia A.M. Peak: BG, TF
WB Dahlia P.M. Peak: EX

2.4%

4.5%

6.9%

Discussion, Recommendations, and Mitigation Measures

P.M.
Peak

4.2%

The eastbound and westbound delays at this intersection are due to the existing signal timings and
lane configurations. While the addition of background growth and trips generated by the background
developments exacerbates the existing failing operation, the infrastructure improvements included in
the DC-LRA Master Plan improve the overall operation at the intersection. However, the eastbound
and westbound approaches still operate under unacceptable conditions, which is exacerbated by the
addition of site generated trips. Adjusting the signal timings during the morning and afternoon peak
hours decreases delay such that the majority of approaches operate at acceptable conditions. The
eastbound approach of Aspen Street remains at an LOS E during the P.M. peak hour, however, as the
amount of green time necessary to mitigate the approach completely would have negative impacts
to the Georgia Avenue corridor. The District of Columbia, the developer of the DC-LRA site, and
DOS would coordinate to ensure that signal timing changes that occur during the DC-LRA Reuse
Plan be done in a way that would improve conditions when the FMC is complete. No additional
signal timing changes would be expected as part of the FMC.

3.4%

The westbound delays at this intersection are due to the existing signal timings and lane configurations.
As part of improvements along Butternut Street, the de facto westbound right-turn lane has been
replaced with a bicycle lane, thus, changes to the lane configurations would negatively impact the
cycling environment at the intersection. Changes to the signal timings such as adding a northbound
left-turn phase were analyzed; however, the addition of a left-turn phase does not allow enough green
time to be shifted to the westbound approach without negatively impacting the southbound movement
of Georgia Avenue. Although the delay increases by more than five seconds along the westbound
approach, there are no recommended changes to this intersection.

5.8%

The westbound delay at this intersection during the P.M. peak hour is due to the existing signal timings
and lane configurations; however, it is improved through implementation of background improvements.
The eastbound delay during the P.M. peak hour and the westbound delay during the A.M. peak
hour is primarily due to the addition of background growth and trips generated by the background
developments. The addition of the site-generated trips exacerbates these conditions. Changes to the
signal timings such as adding a northbound left-turn phase were analyzed; however, the addition of
a left-turn phase does not allow enough green time to be shifted to the westbound approach without
negatively impacting the southbound movement of Georgia Avenue. Although the delay increases
by more than five seconds along the westbound approach, there are no recommended changes to
this intersection.
Continued on following page

Page 63

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.11 - Road Capacity and Mitigation Measures Under the Selected Action Alternative (Continued)

Locations & Scenarios with
LOS E or LOS F

Intersection

Percent Future
Vehicular Traffic
Attributable to
Development
(in TF scenario)

A.M.
Peak

13. Georgia Ave. & Elder
St.

EB Elder Street P.M. Peak: BG, TF
WB Elder Street P.M. Peak: EX

3.8%

Discussion, Recommendations, and Mitigation Measures

P.M.
Peak

2.8%

The delays at this intersection are due to the existing signal timings and lane configurations. The
addition of the background growth, trips generated by the background developments, and the sitegenerated trips exacerbates the intersection. Under existing conditions, the signal is actuated such that
traffic along Georgia Avenue, a major commuter corridor, is given preference. To that end, adjusting
signal timings with the existing control type does not reduce delay along the eastbound approach.
It is recommended that DDOT consider evaluating the operations of this intersection such that a
pre-timed signal plan is implemented.

Near the fomer WRAMC

16th St. & Van Buren St.

Overall A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
Overall P.M. Peak: BG, TF
NB 16th P.M. Peak: TF
SB 16th A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
SB 16th P.M. Peak: BG, TF

4.7%

3.7%

16th St. & Van Buren St.

Overall P.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
NB 16th P.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF

4.5%

3.7%

Georgia Ave. & Van
Buren St.

EB Van Buren A.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF
EB Van Buren P.M. Peak: EX, BG, TF

4.2%

3.5%

The overall intersection delays as well as the northbound and southbound delays at this intersection
are due to the existing split-phase signal timing at these two intersections, which are controlled by one
controller. The addition of the background growth, trips generated by the background developments,
and the site-generated trips exacerbates the existing failing operation and creates additional capacity
issues in the P.M. peak hour. Removing the split phase would result in an unsafe traffic control scenario
and reducing green time along the Van Buren Street approaches does not help alleviate the capacity
issues along 16th Street. Another potential improvement could involve removing the signal along the
eastbound approach of Van Buren Street (since it only serves a few homes and is a dead-end street)
and converting it into a two-way stop-controlled intersection while retaining a signal at the westbound
approach of Van Buren Street. This would increase delay along the eastbound approach that only
serves a few homes and is a dead-end street, but would greatly improve the overall operations at the
two intersections and alleviate excessive delay experienced along the 16th Street corridor, a primary
commuter corridor. It is recommended that the DDOT evaluate this improvement.
The delays at this intersection are due to the existing signal timings and lane configurations. The
addition of the background growth, trips generated by the background developments, and the sitegenerated trips exacerbates the intersection. Under existing conditions, the signal is actuated such that
traffic along Georgia Avenue, a major commuter corridor, is given preference. To that end, adjusting
signal timings with the existing control type does not reduce delay along the eastbound approach.
It is recommended that DDOT consider evaluating the operations of this intersection such that a
pre-timed signal plan is implemented.
Continued on following page

Page 64

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.11 - Road Capacity and Mitigation Measures Under the Selected Action Alternative (Continued)

Intersection

Locations & Scenarios with
LOS E or LOS F

Percent Future
Vehicular Traffic
Attributable to
Development
(in TF scenario)

A.M.
Peak

Georgia Ave. & Fern Pl.

WB Fern A.M. Peak: BG, TF
WB Fern P.M. Peak: BG, TF

2.6%

Discussion, Recommendations, and Mitigation Measures

P.M.
Peak

1.9%

The delays at this intersection are primarily due to the addition of the background growth, trips
generated by the background developments, and the site-generated trips. Under existing conditions,
the signal is actuated such that traffic along Georgia Avenue, a major commuter corridor, is given
preference. To that end, adjusting signal timings with the existing control type does not reduce delay
along the eastbound approach. It is recommended that DDOT consider evaluating the operations
of this intersection such that a pre-timed signal plan is implemented.

Notes:
EX= 2012 Existing Conditions
BG= 2032 Background (without FMC Master Plan)
TF= 2032 Total Future (with FMC Master Plan)
EB=Eastbound
WB=Westbound
SB=Southbound
NB=Northbound

Page 65

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 66

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

3.6.1.3

Heavy Vehicles

Heavy vehicle access to the former WRAMC, during both the construction and operations
phases, will be restricted to Dahlia Street via Georgia Avenue or Main Drive via 16th Street.
Given these access points, each of the driveways along Georgia Avenue and 16th Street would
be required to be designed to meet DDOT acceptable standards for heavy vehicle accessibility
including providing adequate turning radii, limiting visual impediments, and ensuring traffic
does not oppose vehicles entering and exiting the former WRAMC. The DDOT guidelines for
restricting backing maneuvers to or from publicly maintained roads, providing loading services
within alleys where available, and sharing loading access with vehicular driveways would be
followed.
The No Action Alternative would not impact heavy vehicle operations.
The Selected Action Alternative would increase travel by heavy vehicles. Service for trash,
recycling, and deliveries would occur regularly. Overall, many of the heavy vehicle operations
would occur with a standard single unit vehicle, but the Selected Action Alternative would need
to account for access by larger articulated vehicles.
In support of the Selected Action Alternative, DOS would perform the following to improve
heavy vehicle operations:
◊

Heavy vehicle traffic should be limited on local streets through the TMP for the
development which would instruct deliveries and loading operations to the approved
heavy vehicle corridors through this portion of the District of Columbia.

◊

Ensure construction of internal roadways are built to conformance with DDOT standards
and would support the necessary heavy vehicles anticipated to travel the roadway system.

◊

Design pertinent intersections to support the turning maneuvers for the largest design
vehicle expected to visit the FMC.

◊

Loading operations for buildings would be designed to occur from dedicated receiving and
loading areas that are screened from the primary streets. These operations would require
heavy vehicles to pull in and pull out of any loading area. Backing along sidewalks or
crosswalks would not be permitted.

During construction and operation of the FMC, contractors would be required to comply with the
District’s anti-idling law, Rule 20-900, On-road Engine Idling and Non-Road Diesel Engine Idling.

3.6.1.4

Car-Sharing

Three car-sharing companies provide service in the District of Columbia and the study area:
Zipcar, Enterprise Carshare, and Car2Go. Of the three companies, ZipCar retains three locations
within a quarter mile of the FMC site. Enterprise Carshare does not currently have any cars within
a quarter-mile. Both services provide vehicles within one mile of the FMC site. It is anticipated

Page 67

Final Environmental Impact Statement

that additional sites would become available as a result of the DC-LRA redevelopment. Car2Go
currently has a fleet of vehicles throughout the District. Enterprise and ZipCar are a two-way trip
service, where Car2Go is a one-way trip service. In addition, Enterprise and ZipCar have designated
locations to obtain vehicles; Car2Go does not, but locations may be tracked through the web site
(Gorove/Slade, 2017). Exhibit 3.12 provides a summary of available car-share information.

Exhibit 3.12 - Car Sharing
Car-Share Location

Number of Vehicles

Zipcar
The Oklahoma (1401 Tuckerman Street NW)

1

6918 4th Street NW

2

Takoma Metrorail Station

2

Trohv Takoma Metro (232 Carroll Street NW)

7

Takoma Park Metro (408 Cedar Street NW)

1

Enterprise Carshare
6924 Willow Street NW

2

Takoma Park Metro

4

Total Number of Car-Share Vehicles in the Study Area

19

The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact car sharing.

3.6.2 Crash Analysis
A crash analysis was performed using DDOT accident data from 2013 to 2016 to determine if
there was a high accident rate at intersections in the study area. This data included all signalized
intersections adjacent to the former WRAMC, except for intersections that previously operated as
WRAMC gates. For intersections, the accident rate is measured in accidents per million-entering
vehicles (Exhibit 3.13).
According to the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ Transportation Impact Analysis, an
accident rate of 1.0 or higher is an indication that further study is required. A crash rate over
1.0 does not necessarily mean there is a substantial problem at an intersection, but rather it is a
threshold used to identify which intersections may have higher crash rates due to operational,
geometric, or other issues. None of the 16 intersections considered for this report had a crash
rate above 1.0.
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not change commuting patterns,
operations, or geometry of these intersections. However, the changes introduced by the Selected
Action Alternative would have an impact on pedestrian crossings of Georgia Avenue and 16th
Street. As the crash data shows there are a number of pedestrian crashes at intersections along
Georgia Avenue and 16th Street, DOS would coordinate with the DDOT to consider adding
Leading Pedestrian Intervals (LPIs) to the signalized intersections.

Page 68

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.13 - Intersection Crash Rates
Total Crashes

Pedestrian
Crashes

Bike Crashes

Rate per MEV

1. Alaska Ave. & Fern St.

2

0

0

0.27

2. Alaska Ave. & 14th St.

0

0

0

0.00

3.Alaska Ave. & Dahlia St.

1

0

0

0.12

4. 16th St. & Alaska Ave.

22

0

0

0.49

5. 16th St. & Main Dr.

2

0

0

0.04

6. 16th St. & Aspen St.

21

0

1

0.44

7. 14th St. & Aspen St.

4

0

0

0.61

8. Luzon Ave. & Aspen St.

0

0

0

0.00

9. 13th. St. & Aspen St.

2

0

0

0.27

10. Georgia Ave. & Aspen St.

24

2

0

0.82

11. Georgia Ave. & Butternut St.

24

5

0

0.78

12. Georgia Ave. & Dahlia St.

18

0

1

0.60

13. Georgia Ave. & Elder St.

8

0

0

0.26

14. Georgia Ave. & Fern St.

7

0

0

0.23

15. 14th St. & Dahlia St.

0

0

0

0

16. 14th St. & Main Dr.

0

0

0

0

Intersection

MEV = million entering vehicles

3.6.3 Transit Service

The former WRAMC is served by heavy rail and local bus service. These transit services
provide local, city-wide, and regional transit connections and link the former WRAMC with
major cultural, residential, employment, and commercial destinations throughout the region
(Exhibit 3.14).

3.6.3.1

Metrorail Service

The Takoma Station, a multimodal transportation hub on the Metrorail Red Line, is the closest
Metrorail station. Located approximately one mile from the former WRAMC, the station portal is
at Cedar Street/Carroll Street immediately west of Eastern Avenue. Approximately 58 short-term
metered parking spaces, 38 bike racks, 60 bike lockers, 9 bus bays, and 4 car-sharing spaces
available at the station were counted.
The Metrorail Red Line connects the former WRAMC to Silver Spring and Glenmont, Maryland,
to the north and to downtown Washington, DC, Union Station, Chinatown/Gallery Place, and
Metro Center to the south. Trains run frequently during the morning and afternoon peak hours,
approximately every 3 minutes during weekday peak hours, 5–6 minutes during weekday non-peak
hour, every 12–15 minutes on weekday evenings after 7:00 p.m., and 5–15 minutes on the weekends.

3.6.3.2

Metrobus Service

The former WRAMC is serviced by six Metrobus lines with nine distinct routes. Bus stops are
along streets adjacent to the former WRAMC, including 16th Street, Alaska Avenue, Aspen
Street, and Georgia Avenue, and other streets within two or three blocks. Several bus stops are
located between 0.1 and 0.25 mile of the proposed FMC site.

Page 69

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.14 - Existing Transit Routes, Stations, and Stops
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Study Area Boundary
MetroExtra Limited-Stop Route
MetroBus Major Route
MetroBus Local Route
MetroBus Commuter Route
Bus Stops
Metro Stations

N

Not to Scale

Page 70

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The 14th Street Line (Routes 52, 53, and 54) provides service along 14th Street to the south.
They operate between Takoma Station, Butternut Street, Aspen Street, 14th Street, and L’Enfant
Plaza. The routes make stops adjacent to the former WRAMC on Georgia Avenue, Aspen Street,
and 14th Street. Buses run every 10-20 minutes and approximately every 30 minutes in the late
evening and early morning.
The Georgia Avenue Metro Extra Line (Route 79) provides limited-stop bus service along Georgia
Avenue in the study area and runs from the Silver Spring Metrorail station (Red Line) to the
Archives-Navy Memorial/Penn Quarter Metrorail station (Yellow and Green Lines) and serves
four Metrorail stations. Buses run every 10–12 minutes on weekdays from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Although this bus has limited-stop service, it stops adjacent to the former WRAMC at Dahlia Street.
The Georgia Avenue-7th Street Line (Line 70) runs the same route as the Metro Extra Route 79,
though it continues to the L’Enfant Plaza Metrorail station (Yellow, Green, Blue, and Orange
Lines), Waterfront Metrorail station (Green Line), and Fort McNair. It has frequent stops along
Georgia Avenue in the study area. Buses operate every 10–15 minutes and approximately every
30 minutes in the late evening and early morning.
The 16th Street Express (Route S9) has limited stops along 16th Street in the study area,
connecting the Silver Spring Metrorail station, Columbia Heights Metrorail station (Yellow and
Green Lines), and McPherson Square Metrorail station (Blue and Orange Lines). The closest
Metrobus stop to the south is at Somerset Place, approximately one third mile from the southwest
corner of the former WRAMC. The closest stop to the north is at Kalmia Road, which is less
than a half mile from the northeast corner of the former WRAMC. Service is provided every 10
minutes from 6:30 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. on weekdays.
The 16th Street Lines (Routes S2 and S4) connect the Silver Spring Metrorail station to the north
and Federal Triangle Metrorail station (Blue and Orange Lines) to the south. Both lines travel
along 16th Street; however, the S2 travels along Alaska Avenue south of the former WRAMC
and Eastern Avenue north of the former WRAMC. Both lines have headways of approximately
every 15 to 20 minutes on weekdays and weekends.
The Deal Junior High School Line (Route D31) only operates Monday through Friday when
public schools are open. The bus runs once in the morning peak (7:45 a.m.) and once in the
afternoon (3:55 p.m.). This line runs along 16th Street in the study area and connects to Deal
Junior High School at Nebraska Avenue and Fort Drive.

3.6.3.3

Future Transit Service

Two local initiatives will influence the local transportation system and were considered to
be background developments in this study. The Georgia Avenue Great Streets initiative is
focused along Georgia Avenue, between Eastern Avenue and Mount Vernon Square, proposing
improvements for pedestrian/bicycle, transit, and vehicles in order to improve multimodal
mobility in the area. The second initiative is MoveDC: Multimodal Long-Range Transportation
Plan, published by DDOT in October 2014. The purpose of this initiative is to anticipate the

Page 71

Final Environmental Impact Statement

growth of multimodal transportation options in relation to the growth of the District. The goal
is to have recommendations resulting from the study implemented by 2040.
DDOT has developed a plan to identify transit challenges and opportunities and to recommend
investments. This is outlined in the DC’s Transit Future System Plan published by DDOT in
April 2010. This plan includes the reestablishment of streetcar service throughout the District
of Columbia and in the vicinity of the Selected Action Alternative.
The streetcar system plan includes one route that travels along Georgia Avenue and Butternut
Street. The future planned route, named the “Takoma Metrorail Station to Buzzard Point Line,”
would connect the former WRAMC to areas in the District of Columbia including Buzzard Point,
Southwest Waterfront, Chinatown, Metro Center, U Street, and the Georgia Avenue corridor.
Given that redevelopment is expected to attract many transit riders, an orphan line which initially
would not connect to the remaining streetcar network is being considered, connecting the former
WRAMC to the Takoma, Silver Spring, or Georgia Avenue Metrorail stations. This connection
would likely require a dedicated streetcar maintenance facility within the former WRAMC.
The Metro Extra limited-stop bus service element of the plan includes one new route (Route
59) that travels near the former WRAMC along 14th Street. The new limited-stop bus service
would consist of high-frequency buses using specially marked vehicles, operated by WMATA,
which would supplement the four Metro Extra routes that operate along Georgia Avenue, 16th
Street, Wisconsin Avenue, and Pennsylvania Avenue.
According to MoveDC, several Metrobus improvements are also expected within the study area.
The three Metrobus lines that service the site are all a part of the Priority Corridor Network.
As part of the plan, dedicated transit space along 16th Street in the form of bus lanes is being
studied and expected to be completed prior to the completion of the FMC.
The future planned corridor near the former WRAMC is along 14th Street, which would connect
the Takoma Metrorail Station, Aspen Street, WRAMC, Columbia Heights, the U Street corridor
and Downtown at Pennsylvania Avenue. Metro Extra runs along Georgia Avenue as Route 79.
The District of Columbia Circulator plans to provide service as part of its long-term (Fiscal Year
2019-2020) planning efforts. The added service would connect Tenleytown to Silver Spring by way of
Rock Creek Park and Georgia Avenue. While a formal route has yet to be determined, this Circulator is
planned to provide enhanced bus service to the upper northwest portions of the District of Columbia.
The No Action Alternative would not impact transit services.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, through streets within the FMC would be able to accommodate
buses should bus routes and/or stops be considered in the future by DDOT or WMATA. The Selected
Action Alternative would increase use in both Metrorail and Metrobus. In support of the Selected
Action Alternative, DOS would perform the following to increase transit usage:

Page 72

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

Coordinate with DDOT and the DC-LRA Reuse Plan team on future streetcar and other
long-term transit improvements;

◊

During the development, review transit facilities along 16th Street and Alaska Avenue
for potential improvements and consolidation;

◊

As part of the planning process between DDOT, WMATA, and the DC-LRA development
team, provide assistance in the service modification for transit lines and streetcar servicing
the streets interior to WRAMC; and

◊

In locations where available and appropriate, coordinate with WMATA to provide bus
shelters, bus stops, and layover areas along the boundary of FMC and within and along
the boundary of former WRAMC.

3.6.4 Pedestrian Facilities
Most pedestrians accessing the former WRAMC arrive from adjacent residential neighborhoods
to the north and south, bus stops along 16th Street and Georgia Avenue, or from the Takoma
Metrorail Station. Nearly all streets in the study area have sidewalks, planted buffers between
sidewalks and the curb, and on-street parking that provide an additional buffer between pedestrians
and vehicular traffic. Existing deficiencies are along Aspen Street which provides sidewalks only
in sections along the southern portion of the road and Luzon Avenue which does not provide
sidewalks on the eastern side of the road.
A range of pedestrian facilities exists in the study area adjacent to the former WRAMC. Crosswalks,
curb ramps, and pedestrian signal heads with countdown displays are provided at some signalized
intersections. Many unsignalized intersections have crosswalks and curb ramps. Along 16th Street
between Aspen Street and Alaska Avenue, most intersections have crosswalks and curb ramps
for north-south movements and a crosswalk on either the north or south side of the intersection
for pedestrians crossing 16th Street. Sidewalks, crosswalks, and curb ramps are provided along
Georgia Avenue in the study area. The sidewalk along the western side of Georgia Avenue is in
poor condition; walking conditions along Fern Street and Alaska Avenue are similar.
At intersections along Aspen Street, crosswalks and curb ramps are provided for east-west
movements on the south side of the street. Most of the intersections along Aspen Street do not
accommodate north-south movements because there are no sidewalks along the north side of
Aspen Street despite the presence of bus stops on the northern side of the street.
The Takoma Metrorail station is approximately one mile from the former WRAMC. The bus stops
along Georgia Avenue and 16th Street serve bus routes that provide local and express service
between the study area and Silver Spring to the north and downtown Washington, DC to the south.
Pedestrians access these bus stops along the local pedestrian network that borders the former
WRAMC and within the residential neighborhoods adjacent to the former WRAMC. There is
some pedestrian activity between the residential neighborhoods and the former WRAMC and

Page 73

Final Environmental Impact Statement

the Takoma Metrorail station. However, pedestrians must navigate around the former WRAMC
if they are traveling between neighborhoods to the west and the Takoma station.
Georgia Avenue is the primary commercial corridor within the study area. Commercial activities
are concentrated north of Fern Street and south of Van Buren Street. There is pedestrian activity
through the study area due to these commercial uses, primarily during the midday lunch period
and evening dinner period. Additionally, as part of future improvements along Aspen Street
provided in conjunction with the DC-LRA Reuse Plan, improved pedestrian facilities along
the north side of the street would be completed by connecting Georgia Avenue to 16th Street.
The No Action Alternative would not impact pedestrian facilities.
The Selected Action Alternative would add to pedestrian traffic in the study area. In support of the
Selected Action Alternative, DOS would perform the following to improve pedestrian facilities:
◊

Improve pedestrian conditions along east-west and north-south pedestrian routes within
the FMC. Recommended improvements include expanding sidewalk widths, removing
obstructions, installing and upgrading crosswalks at intersections, and installing LPIs and
traffic calming measures such as speed tables, decorative pavers, bulb outs at intersections,
and the like. These would include improving pedestrian accessibility at the reopened
gates and in the open spaces areas along 16th Street, Alaska Avenue, Fern Street, Georgia
Avenue, and Aspen Street.

◊

Add east-west and north-south pedestrian connections through the FMC to provide better
access and routing between the FMC and the surrounding neighborhood. New routing options
and crossing locations would help disperse pedestrian traffic, which would mitigate the impact
of increased pedestrian volumes to any one intersection or sidewalk segment. It would reduce
the need to make significant changes to intersections that would attract additional pedestrian
volumes warranting new traffic control devices or changes to intersection geometry.

3.6.5 Bicycle Facilities
The former WRAMC is served by multiuse trails, signed bicycle routes, and local streets that
accommodate cycling. The bicycle network generally provides good conditions for local trips,
and there are several routes for trips between the study area and Silver Spring, Takoma Park,
and other destinations in Northwest Washington, DC.
There are multiuse trails within cycling distance of the site, including the Metropolitan Branch
Trail, which links Silver Spring and Union Station, and the Rock Creek Parkway Trail, which
connects Maryland with the Georgetown waterfront and the National Mall. These facilities foster
good cycling conditions for bicycle commuting and recreational riding. Some major destinations
within a 3-mile ride include Columbia Heights and Chevy Chase Circle. It is approximately 1.75
miles to Silver Spring and 2.5 miles to the Georgia Avenue Metrorail stations.

Page 74

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Bicycle activity is highest along the multiuse trails and streets with designated bike lanes.
Multiuse trails and bike lanes encourage cycling by providing separate facilities that give
cyclists an elevated sense of safety due to increased visibility and designated pathways. The
highest observed bicycle volumes in the study area were along 16th Street and Georgia Avenue.
Exhibit 3.15 illustrates the existing bicycle facilities within the region.
Cyclists typically use street signs, parking meters, or similar objects to secure their bicycles.
Most of the bicycle traffic on 16th Street was along the sidewalk. While the sidewalk in this
area is not designated for cycling, it is wide in most locations and DDOT permits bicycles on
sidewalks outside of the Central Business District. Traffic conditions along 16th Street, with its
hard curbs and high travel speeds, make riding undesirable.
The Capital Bikeshare was launched in September 2010 to replace the DC SmartBike program.
This program has placed over 400 bicycle-share stations across the District of Columbia;
Arlington, VA; Alexandria, VA; Fairfax, VA; and Montgomergy County, MD, with over 3,500
bicycles provided. At the time data were collected, no Capital Bikeshare stations existed in the
study area. However, several potential stations have been identified for placement by DDOT,
and the system is continually expanding.
The No Action Alternative would not impact bicycle facilities.
The Selected Action Alternative would impact bicycle facilities by increasing demand for bicycle
parking and storage, demand for Capital Bikeshare docks and facilities in or near the former
WRAMC, and increased safety and visibility for cyclists. In support of the Selected Action
Alternative, DOS is committed to the following mitigation measures to improve bicycle facilities:
◊

Ensure roadways internal to the FMC accommodate bicycle travel;

◊

All shared-use trails shall be designed to a minimum of 10 feet wide to accommodate
bicycle and pedestrian activities;

◊

Recommend bicycle facilities be extended by the District of Columbia at the northern
edge of the former WRAMC campus;

◊

Provide land, installation funding, and first year’s operating expenses for a Capital
Bikeshare station at the NE corner of the 14th Street and Dahlia Street intersection or
other mutually acceptable location on the FMC campus;

◊

Provide installation funding and first year's operating expenses for a second Capital
Bikeshare station at the Takoma Metrorail station or in the adjacent neighborhood; and

◊

Provide crosswalks and all-way stops at FMC entrances to ensure bicycle access.

Through each chancery TMP, foreign missions would be encouraged to provide the bicycle
commuter benefits to employees, and provide bike racks on site. Exhibit 3.15 illustrates the recommendations for bicycle facilities within the former WRAMC and the surrounding area. Chanceries
would be expected to substantially comply with the following District zoning regulations:

Page 75

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.15 - Existing and Proposed Bicycle Facilities
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Study Area Boundary
Existing Multi-use Trails
Proposed Multi-use Trails
Bike Lanes and Sharrows
Proposed Bike Lanes and Sharrows
Existing On-street Signed Routes
Proposed On-street Signed Routes
Existing Fair Suitability for Bikes
Existing Poor Suitability for Bikes
Bike Sales and Repair Shops
Existing Capital Bike Share Locations
Proposed Capital Bike Share Locations

N

Not to Scale

Page 76

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

Provide one long-term bike parking space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area
(GFA) and one short-term bike parking space per 40,000 square feet of GFA;

◊

Provide two showers for the first 25,000 square feet of GFA. An additional two showers
shall be installed for every 50,000 square feet of GFA above the above the first 25,000
square feet, up to a maximum requirement of six showers; and

◊

Provide a minimum number of clothing lockers equal to 60% of the required long-term
bicycle parking spaces.

3.7

AIR QUALITY

The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not negatively impact the air quality of
the study area.
Federal air quality policies are regulated through the federal CAA. Pursuant to this act, the
EPA has established National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for the following air
pollutants (termed “criteria” pollutants): carbon monoxide (CO), ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide
(NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), respirable particulate matter defined as particulate matter less than
10 micrometers in aerodynamic diameter (PM10), fine particulate matter defined as particulate
matter less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter (PM2.5), and lead (Exhibit 3.16). There are two
types of NAAQS for criteria air pollutants:
◊

Primary standards are designed to protect public health, including sensitive populations
such as asthmatics, children, and the elderly.

◊

Secondary standards are designed to protect public welfare and the environment by
preventing visibility impairment or damage to crops, vegetation, and buildings.

EPA designates regions and counties based on whether the area is complying with the NAAQS. A
region that is meeting the air quality standard for a pollutant is designated as being in “attainment”
for that pollutant. If the region is not meeting the air quality standard, it is designated as being
in “nonattainment” for that pollutant. Areas that were previously designated as nonattainment
areas but have recently met the standard are designated as “maintenance” areas. The study area
is designated a nonattainment area for O3 and a maintenance area for CO. The study area is in
attainment for other criteria pollutants (USEPA, 2016).
The CAA was amended in 1977 to require each state to maintain a SIP for achieving compliance
with the NAAQS. In 1990, the CAA was amended to strengthen regulation of both stationary
and motor vehicle emission sources. Conformity to the SIP is defined under the 1990 CAA
amendments as “conformity to an implementation plan’s purpose of eliminating or reducing the
severity and number of violations of the national ambient air quality standards and achieving
expeditious attainment of such standards.”

Page 77

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.16 - National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Washington, DC
Pollutant
CO

primary

Lead

primary and secondary

NO2
O3

Particle
Pollution

Primary/Secondary
Standard

Averaging
Time

Level

Form

8-hour

9 ppm

1-hour

35 ppm

Not to be exceeded more than once per
year

Rolling 3-month
average

0.15 µg/m3(1)

Not to be exceeded

primary

1-hour

100 ppb

98th percentile, averaged over 3 years

primary and secondary

Annual

53 ppb(2)

Annual Mean

primary and secondary

8-hour

0.075 ppm(3)

Annual

15 µg/m3

Annual mean, averaged over 3 years

24-hour

35 µg/m3

98th percentile, averaged over 3 years
Not to be exceeded more than once per
year on average over 3 years

Annual fourth-highest daily maximum
8-hour concentration, averaged over 3
years

PM2.5

primary and secondary

PM10

primary and secondary

24-hour

150 µg/m3

primary

1-hour

75 ppb(4)

99th percentile of 1-hour daily
maximum concentrations, averaged
over 3 years

secondary

3-hour

0.5 ppm

Not to be exceeded more than once per
year

SO2

Source: EPA, 2012 as of October 2011
Notes:
(1) Final rule signed October 15, 2008. The 1978 lead standard (1.5 µg/m3 as a quarterly average) remains in effect until one year after an
area is designated for the 2008 standard, except that in areas designated nonattainment for the 1978 standard, the 1978 standard remains in
effect until implementation plans to attain or maintain the 2008 standard are approved.
(2) Official level of the annual NO2 standard is 0.053 ppm, equal to 53 ppb, shown for the purpose of clearer comparison to the 1-hour
standard.
(3) Final rule signed March 12, 2008. The 1997 ozone standard (0.08 ppm, annual fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour concentration,
averaged over 3 years) and related implementation rules remain in place. In 1997, EPA revoked the 1-hour ozone standard (0.12 ppm, not to
be exceeded more than once per year) in all areas, although some areas have continued obligations under that standard (“anti-backsliding”).
The 1-hour ozone standard is attained when the expected number of days per calendar year with maximum hourly average concentrations
above 0.12 ppm is less than or equal to 1.
(4) Final rule signed June 2, 2010. The 1971 annual and 24-hour SO2 standards were revoked in that same rulemaking. However, these
standards remain in effect until 1 year after an area is designated for the 2010 standard, except in areas designated nonattainment for the 1971
standards, where the 1971 standards remain in effect until implementation plans to attain or maintain the 2010 standard are approved.

3.7.1 Transportation Conformity
Transportation conformity is an analytical process required for federally funded transportation
plans, programs, or projects. Air quality provisions in the CAA, Title 40 of the CFR, Parts 51
and 93 and transportation planning provisions of Title 23 and Title 49 of the United States Code,
are intended to ensure that integrated transportation and air quality planning occurs in the areas
designated by EPA as nonattainment or maintenance for ambient levels of CO, O3, NO2, PM2.5,
and PM10. Transportation conformity requires two conformity determinations: regional conformity
determination and project-level conformity determination in nonattainment and maintenance areas
for O3, CO, PM2.5, and PM10. The demonstration of project-level conformity consists of showing
that the proposed action is listed in, and consistent with, a conforming regional transportation plan
and transportation improvement plan (TIP). Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments
(MWCOG) is the local agency that prepares the Constrained Long Range Plan (CLRP).

Page 78

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The CLRP identifies regionally significant transportation projects and programs that are planned
in the Washington Metropolitan Area between 2015 and 2040. The MWCOG prepares the air
quality conformity analysis for the CLRP and TIP.

3.7.2 Regional Conformity
The proposed action is in a federal nonattainment area for O3 and a maintenance area for CO;
therefore, transportation conformity is applicable to these pollutants. Regional conformity
applies to long-range metropolitan transportation plans, shorter-term metropolitan TIPs, and
transportation projects funded or approved by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) or
Federal Transit Administration. The Air Quality Conformity Determination of the 2015 CLRP
and the Fiscal Year 2015–2020 TIP for the Washington Metropolitan Region was approved in
October 2015. The analysis demonstrates that mobile source emissions, estimated for the TIP
and for each analysis year of the long-range plan, adhere to emissions budgets.
For regional conformity, MWCOG performs modeling that includes proposed actions that are
considered regionally significant. The roads within the study area are in this category and were
not included in the regional highway network. Therefore, the proposed action is considered “not
regionally significant” for the purposes of regional air quality.

3.7.3 Mobile Source Air Toxic Analysis
FHWA Interim Guidance Update on Mobile Source Air Toxic [MSAT] Analysis in NEPA (2016)
describes how to evaluate MSAT emissions for transportation projects. FHWA developed a tiered
approach for analyzing MSATs, depending on specific circumstances. FHWA has identified
three levels of analysis:
◊

No analysis for actions with no potential for meaningful MSAT effects.

◊

Qualitative analysis for actions with low potential MSAT effects.

◊

Quantitative analysis to differentiate alternatives for actions with higher potential MSAT
effects.

The projected annual average daily traffic for the proposed action would be less than 140,000 to
150,000 in the year 2032. Therefore, the proposed action does not meet the criteria for higher potential
MSAT effects and would be classified as having a low potential for MSAT effects (second level).
For the Selected Action Alternative, the amount of MSATs emitted would be proportional to the
vehicle miles traveled (VMT). The VMT estimated for the Selected Action Alternative is slightly
higher than that for the No Action Alternative because the proposed action attracts vehicles that would
not otherwise occur in the study area. This increase in VMT means MSATs in the study area under
the Selected Action Alternative would probably be higher than under the No Action Alternative.

Page 79

Final Environmental Impact Statement

For the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives, emissions are virtually certain to be lower in the
year 2032 than at present levels, as a result of the EPA’s national control programs that are projected
to reduce annual MSAT emissions by over 80 percent from 2010 to 2050. Local conditions may differ
from these national projections in terms of fleet mix and turnover, VMT growth rates, and local control
measures. However, the magnitude of the EPA-projected reductions is so great (even after accounting
for VMT growth) that MSAT emissions in the study area are likely to be lower in the future.

3.8

NOISE

Noise is generally defined as unwanted sound. Sound is all around us; it becomes noise when
it interferes with normal activities such as speech, concentration, or sleep. Ambient noise (the
existing background noise environment) can be generated by a number of noise sources, including
mobile sources, such as automobiles and trucks, and stationary sources, such as construction sites,
machinery, or industrial operations. There is an existing and variable level of natural ambient
noise from sources such as wind, streams and rivers, and wildlife.
The physical characteristics of sound consist of intensity, frequency, and duration. Sound is
created by acoustic energy, which produces pressure waves that travel through the air and are
sensed by the eardrum. As the acoustic energy increases, the intensity or amplitude of these
pressure waves increases, and the ear senses louder noise. The unit used to measure the intensity
of sound is the decibel (dB).

Exhibit 3.17 - Noise Level Comparisons

Sound is measured with instruments that record
instantaneous sound levels in dB. A-weighted
sound level measurements (dB[A]) are used to
characterize sound levels that can be sensed by
the human ear. A-weighting emphasizes sounds
in the range of human hearing (USEPA, 1974).
The typical measurement for quieter sounds,
such as rustling leaves or a quiet room, is from
20 to 30 dB(A) (Exhibit 3.17). Conversational
speech is commonly 60 dB(A), and a residential
lawn mower measures approximately 98 dB(A).
Sound levels expressed herein are A-weighted.
Noise abatement was evaluated using DDOT and
FHWA criteria. DDOT Noise Abatement Criteria
(NAC) for specific land use activities were used
in the evaluation of traffic noise. These criteria
are based on criteria established in Title 23 CFR,
Part 772, U.S. Department of Transportation,
FHWA, Procedures for Abatement of Highway
Traffic Noise and Construction Noise, and
guidelines for “increase over existing” noise

Page 80

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

levels as set forth in DDOT Publication District Department of Transportation Noise Policy,
dated January 10, 2011. Predicted noise levels were determined using Version 2.5 of FHWA
Traffic Noise Model (TNM).
Noise levels are A-weighted hourly equivalent noise levels in dBs (Leq [h] dB[A]). The hourly
Leq, or equivalent sound level, is the level of constant sound that, in an hour, would contain the
same acoustic energy as the time-varying sound (i.e., the fluctuating sound levels of traffic noise
are represented in terms of a steady-state noise level of the same energy content). A-weighting
simulates the response of the human ear to noise. FHWA and DDOT define noise impact based
upon seven activity categories (Exhibit 3.18). Individual sites in a given activity category are
designated as noise-sensitive receptors.
Ambient noise measurements were conducted throughout the study area. Within each noisesensitive area, short-term (20-minute duration) noise measurements and concurrent traffic counts
were taken (Exhibit 3.19).
Short-term measurements were taken at various times of the day and did not necessarily represent
the noisiest condition at a particular measurement site. In addition, measurement sites were
positioned to enable validation of the noise prediction model and to define existing noise levels
for second-row residences. Measurements were used primarily for purposes of noise model
validation, with year 2012 peak hour traffic volumes assumed in the prediction of worst-case
existing noise levels. Measured existing Leq noise levels at short-term measurement sites ranged

Exhibit 3.18 - Hourly Weighted Sound Levels dB(A) for Various Land Use Activity
Categories
Land Use
Activity
Category

Leq(h)

Description of Land Use Activity Category

A

57 (exterior)

Lands on which serenity and quiet are of extraordinary significance and serve an important
public need and where the preservation of those qualities is essential if the area is to
continue to serve its intended purpose.

B

67 (exterior)

Residential

C

67 (exterior)

Active sport areas, amphitheaters, auditoriums, campgrounds, cemeteries, day care centers,
hospitals, libraries, medical facilities, parks, picnic areas, places of worship, playgrounds,
public meeting rooms, public or nonprofit institutional structures, radio studios, recording
studios, recreation areas, Section 4(f) sites, schools, television studios, trails, and trail
crossings.

D

52 (interior)

Auditoriums, day care centers, hospitals, libraries, medical facilities, places of worship,
public meeting rooms, public or nonprofit institutional structures, radio studios, recording
studios, schools, and television studios.

E

72 (exterior)

Hotels, motels, offices, restaurants/bars, and other developed lands, properties, or activities
not included in A – D or F.

F

-

Agriculture, airports, bus yards, emergency services, industrial, logging, maintenance
facilities, manufacturing, mining, rail yards, retail facilities, shipyards, utilities (water
resources, water treatment, electrical), and warehousing.

G

-

Undeveloped lands that are not permitted.

Page 81

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.19 - Noise Measurement and Analysis Sites
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Study Area Boundary
M##

Noise Measurement
Site

R##

Noise Analysis
Site

N

0’

Page 82

400’

800’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

from 49 to 68 dB(A) (Exhibit 3.20). Based on the acreage reduction and revised 2014 traffic
counts for the FMC, it is expected that predicted future sound levels would not exceed the future
sound levels previously calculated.
Using the traffic data obtained with the short-term noise measurements, noise levels were
modeled and compared to measured noise levels. Measured versus modeled noise levels were
within the acceptable 3 dB(A) range (except at Sites M-7 and M-8 where measured noise levels
were elevated due to background noise that included ambulance sirens and helicopter flying).
The results of the validation process were used to “build” FHWA TNM Version 2.5, used for
purposes of modeling potential noise impacts for the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives.
FHWA TNM predicts noise levels at selected locations based on traffic data, roadway design,
topographic features, and the relationship of the analysis site to nearby roadways. The percentages
of automobiles, medium trucks, and heavy trucks used in the FHWA TNM were developed from
review of traffic classification data obtained during the noise measurement periods corresponding
to the periods of highest noise levels.
The noise levels from the future year were compared to the absolute NAC levels (66 dB[A])
and to the increases over existing year noise levels using DDOT’s NAC to determine if there
would be any noise impacts (Exhibit 3.21). Noise impacts were identified based on predicted
exterior noise levels exceeding the absolute 66 dB(A) criteria level for Activity Category B.
Under the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives, noise levels in the study area are predicted
to remain constant at Activity Category B (residential level) for most sites modeled. Noise levels
are predicted to increase to Activity Category C (institutional level, e.g., schools and recreation
areas) at 14 of the 58 sites modeled. The majority of the impacted receptors are along Georgia
Avenue. These “increase over existing” noise levels were generally the result of normal traffic
growth predicted to occur between 2012 and 2032. Therefore, projected noise impacts do not
differ perceptibly between the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives.
Consideration of noise abatement was required for receptors with future noise levels that exceeded
66 dB(A). Noise abatement on non-controlled or partial access control highways usually is not
feasible; most of the District has existing roadways with a narrow ROW. The District also has a
historic character with viewsheds of national importance. Based on the amount of direct access
along the corridor and limited ROW, constructing noise barriers is not feasible.

Page 83

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.20 - Validation Results
TNM Model
Calibration Noise
Levels in dB(A)

Hourly Traffic Based on
Concurrent Traffic Counts

0

0

3

0

90

EB Alaska Ave.

72

0

0

0

0

72

WB Alaska Ave.

87

0

0

3

0

90

EB Alaska Ave.

72

0

0

0

0

72

M3

Roundabout near
7726 15th Pl.

WB Alaska Ave.

78

0

0

3

0

81

EB Alaska Ave.

105

0

0

6

0

111

M4

Corner of 14th St. and Alaska
Ave.

WB Alaska Ave.

318

9

3

15

6

351

EB Alaska Ave.

111

0

0

9

0

120

M5

WB Fern St.
7301 Alaska Avenue, Corner
of Fern Street and Alaska Ave. EB Fern St.

30

0

0

0

0

30

15

0

0

0

0

15

M6

Residence at the corner of
Floral St.& Alaska Ave.

WB Alaska Ave.

243

3

0

12

0

258

EB Alaska Ave

105

0

0

9

0

114

M7

1129 Fern St. (setback)

WB Fern St.

9

0

0

0

0

9

EB Fern St.

9

0

0

0

0

9

M8

7311 12th St. (setback)

NB 13th St.

5

0

0

0

0

5

SB 13th St.

4

0

0

0

0

4

M9

1129 Fern St. (setback)

WB Fern St.

6

0

0

0

0

6

EB Fern St.

30

0

0

0

0

30

M10

7311 12th St.

NB 12th St.

6

0

0

0

0

6

SB 12th St.

6

0

0

0

0

6

M11

Parking lot, Corner of
Elder St. & Georgia Ave.

NB Georgia Ave.

477

9

6

9

6

507

SB Georgia Ave.

531

12

3

9

0

555

M12

Parking lot, Corner of
Elder St. & Georgia Ave.

WB Elder St.

7

0

0

0

0

7

EB Elder St.

8

0

0

0

0

8

M13

Corner of Georgia Ave. &
Dahlia St. (setback)

NB Georgia Ave.

633

6

3

15

0

657

SB Georgia Ave.

507

6

0

9

0

522

M14

Corner of Georgia Ave. &
Dahlia St. (setback)

WB Dahlia St.

45

0

0

0

0

45

EB Dahlia St.

45

0

0

0

0

45

M15

Corner of Georgia Ave. &
Butternut St. (setback)

NB Georgia Ave.

387

6

0

12

0

405

SB Georgia Ave.

528

6

6

12

0

552

Difference

87

Measured
Leq

Total

WB Alaska Ave.

Roadway

Modeled
Leq(h)

Motorcycles

M2

Our Lady of Lebanon
Maronite Catholic Church

Buses

Across Street from
7110 Alaska Ave.

Heavy Trucks

M1

Medium
Trucks

Location

Autos

Site

59.5

62.9

-3.4

59.8

59.0

0.8

48.6

48.5

0.1

63.2

64.1

-0.9

56.0

55.2

0.8

64.3

64.5

-0.2

49.5

53.1

-3.6

47.6

52.2

-4.6

52.1

52.5

-0.4

48.9

51.6

-2.7

66.2

66.7

-0.5

58.7

58.4

0.3

67.7

68.3

-0.6

55.6

57.3

-1.7

66.4

68.2

-1.8

Continued on following page

Page 84

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.20 - Validation Results (Continued)
TNM Model
Calibration Noise
Levels in dB(A)

Hourly Traffic Based on
Concurrent Traffic Counts

Buses

Motorcycles

Total

15

0

33

0

99

EB Butternut St.

39

3

3

3

0

48

WB Aspen St.

345

3

0

3

3

354

EB Aspen St.

132

0

0

3

0

135

NB 13th St.

36

0

0

0

0

36

SB 13th St.

15

0

0

0

0

15

WB Aspen St.

60

3

0

6

0

69

EB Aspen St.

60

0

0

0

0

60

See M19

0

0

0

0

0

0

See M19

0

0

0

0

0

0

WB Aspen St.

123

3

0

0

0

126

EB Aspen St.

51

0

0

0

0

51

Back of Property on
Whittier Pl. (1400 block)

See M21

0

0

0

0

0

0

See M21

0

0

0

0

0

0

Background Rock Creek Park

Background

Corner of Georgia Ave. &
Butternut St. (setback)

M17

6669 13th St. (setback)

M18

6665 13th St. (setback)

M19

1328 14th Pl. (setback)

M20

Residence 14th Pl. (setback)

M21

1432 Aspen St.

M22
M23

Difference

Heavy Trucks

51

M16

Roadway

Measured
Leq

Medium
Trucks

WB Butternut St.

Location

Modeled
Leq(h)

Autos

Site

57.9

59.1

-1.2

60.8

62.5

-1.7

56.6

55.4

1.2

57.3

58.6

-1.3

51.4

53.2

-1.8

58.8

59.9

-1.1

49.8

49.4

0.4

55.3

Page 85

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.21 - Summary of Modeled Noise Levels at Measurement Sites and
Receptors
Future No Action (2032)
Site ID

Existing 2011

M1

Future Selected Action Alternative
(2032)

Noise Levels

Increase Over
Existing

Noise Levels

Increase Over
Existing

63

63

0

63

0

M2

62

65

3

65

3

M3

51

53

2

53

2

M4

60

62

2

63

3

M5

56

59

3

59

3

M6

62

64

2

64

2

M7

55

58

3

58

3

M8

52

54

2

54

2

M9

58

61

3

61

3

M10

57

58

1

58

1

M11

67

67

0

67

0

M12

60

61

1

61

1

M13

69

69

0

68

-1

M14

59

60

1

61

2

M15

69

69

0

69

0

M16

57

60

3

60

3

M17

62

62

0

62

0

M18

58

59

1

59

1

M19

62

63

1

63

1

M20

56

57

1

57

1

M21

64

65

1

65

1

M22

55

56

1

56

1

R1

58

60

2

60

2

R2

57

59

2

59

2

R3

58

60

2

60

2

R4

59

60

1

61

2

R5

53

56

3

56

3

R6

53

56

3

56

3

R7

56

58

2

59

3

R8

57

59

2

60

3

R9

60

62

2

62

2

R10

64

66

2

66

2

R11

66

66

0

66

0
Continued on following page

Page 86

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.21 - Summary of Modeled Noise Levels at Measurement Sites and
Receptors (Continued)
Future No Action (2032)
Site ID

Existing 2011

R12

Future Selected Action Alternative
(2032)

Noise Levels

Increase Over
Existing

Noise Levels

Increase Over
Existing

67

67

0

67

0

R13

67

67

0

66

-1

R14

67

67

0

67

0

R15

69

69

0

69

0

R16

69

69

0

68

-1

R17

67

67

0

67

0

R18

69

69

0

69

0

R19

68

68

0

69

1

R20

67

67

0

68

1

R21

68

68

0

69

1

R22

66

67

1

67

1

R23

64

65

1

65

1

R24

64

64

0

64

0

R25

63

63

0

63

0

R26

62

62

0

62

0

R27

61

62

1

62

1

R28

60

62

2

62

2

R29

59

61

2

61

2

R30

62

64

2

64

2

R31

62

63

1

63

1

R32

62

63

1

63

1

R33

62

63

1

63

1

R34

62

63

1

63

1

R35

62

62

0

62

0

R36

61

62

1

62

1

Page 87

Final Environmental Impact Statement

3.9

LAND USE, AESTHETICS, AND VISUAL RESOURCES

Land use, zoning, and public policy information was obtained from the District of Columbia
Office of Planning, the DC-LRA, and NCPC.

3.9.1 Land Use and Zoning
3.9.1.1 Existing Land Use and Zoning

The study area contains a mixture of institutional, residential, commercial, transportation, and
parks and open space land uses (Exhibit 3.22). Land use on the former WRAMC consists of 66
buildings totaling 55.3 acres, 9.7 acres of internal roadway, 10.7 acres of parking (4,282 designated
spaces), 10.3 noncontiguous wooded acres, and 25.0 mowed acres. Prior to the base closure, the
buildings were used as administrative offices, military personnel and military family housing,
military training and operation centers, hospital and medical facilities, research and development
laboratories, community recreation and activity centers, and to house utilities (DOA, 2005). The
roads bordering the former WRAMC are Alaska Avenue and 16th Street to the west and Fern
Street to the north. To the east and south, the study area consists of a vacant portion of the former
WRAMC, as well as Georgia Avenue, which borders the overall campus to the east and Aspen
Street, which borders the campus to the south. Within the DOS portion of the former WRAMC,
land use consists of 12.8 acres of existing buildings, 1.8 acres of internal roadways, 2.9 acres of
parking, 8.4 noncontiguous wooded acres, and 5.8 mowed acres. The neighborhoods of Shepherd
Park, Takoma, and Brightwood surround the former WRAMC.

The study area includes approximately 80 acres of Rock Creek Park to the west of 16th Street.
The former WRAMC is surrounded on its northern and southern boundaries by predominantly
low-density residential land use, consisting of established neighborhoods of detached, single
family homes. Interspersed in these areas are small, community-oriented institutions such as
recreation centers and religious institutions. South of Aspen Street, there is an area of higher
density residential (three to fivestory apartment buildings) along 14th Street. Georgia Avenue is
the primary commercial area for this part of the District. Land use along Georgia Avenue consists
of a mixture of commercial and higher density residential (row houses and low-rise apartment
buildings). Fronting Georgia Avenue, between Aspen and Dahlia Streets, are apartment buildings
and a motel. North of Dahlia Street, a row of houses faces Georgia Avenue. Further to the east
of Georgia Avenue, single-family residential land use predominates.
According to the District of Columbia Office of Zoning (2016), the study area contains 13
residential zoning designations (exhibit 3.23):

Page 88

◊

R-1-B – The DOS portion of the former WRAMC campus, and areas to the north and
south are zoned R-1-B, which permits high-density (50-foot lot width, 5,000-square foot
minimum lot size), single-family detached housing.

◊

R-2 – The northeast portion of the study area west of Georgia Avenue, and a pocket
in the southwest portion of the study area are zoned R-2, which permits one-family,
semi-detached and detached housing.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.22 - Existing Land Use
Legend
Study Area Boundary
Proposed FMC Site Boundary
Former WRAMC Campus Boundary
Low-Density Residential
Low-Medium-Density Residential

14TH STREET

13TH STREET

Medium-Density Residential
High-Density Residential
Parks and Open Spaces

FERN STREET

E

Federal Public

NU
AV
E

GEORGIA AVEN
UE

KA
AS
AL

DAHLIA STREET

MAIN DRIVE

13TH STREET

LU
ZO
N

AV
E

NU

E

ASPEN STREET
14TH STREET

Commercial

16TH STREET

Public/Institutional

N

0’

400’

800’

Page 89

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.23 - Zoning
R-1-A
R-2
C-2-A

R-2

14TH STREET

13TH STREET

R-1-B

FERN STREET

NU

E

WR-1
KA

AV
E

WR-2

AL

GEORGIA AVEN
UE

AS

WR-3

DAHLIA STREET

16TH STREET

Rock Creek
Park

WR-4
MAIN DRIVE

WR-6
WR-5
WR-5

WR-7

WR-8

WR-3

R-1-B

R-1-B

NU
E
AV
E

R-5-A

R-5-B

13TH STREET

R-2

LU
ZO
N

14TH STREET

ASPEN STREET

R-1-B

C-2-A
N

0’

Page 90

400’

800’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

C-2-A – The northeast portion of the study area along Georgia Avenue is zoned C-2-A,
a medium-density commercial zone found in low-medium-density residential areas
outside the District’s central core, to include office employment centers, commercial
strip shopping centers and medium-bulk mixed-use centers.

◊

WR-1 – Residential zone on former WRAMC intended to transition from low-scale
residential use north of Fern Street to medium-density residential and commercial uses
proposed south of Elder Street (18-ft lot width, four to five story maximum height, 70%
maximum lot occupancy).

◊

WR-2 – Mixed-use commercial and residential zone on former WRAMC (maximum
height of seven stories, 100% lot occupancy permitted on first two stories, 80% maximum
residential lot occupancy above the first two stories).

◊

WR-3 – Moderate- to medium-density commercial and residential zone on former
WRAMC (five to six story maximum, 100% lot occupancy permitted on first two stories,
80% maximum residential lot occupancy above the first two stories).

◊

WR-4 – Moderate-density commercial and residential zone on former WRAMC intended to
adaptively reuse and sensitively develop proximate to historic resources (three to four story
maximum, 50-100% maximum lot occupancy depending on proximity to historic structures).

◊

WR-5 – Moderate-density residential and commercial zone on former WRAMC, supporting
arts and cultural uses, green connections and recreation opportunities (two to three story
maximum, 35-75% maximum lot occupancy, depending on proximity to historic structures).

◊

WR-6 – Green space zone on former WRAMC intended to preserve the unique character
of the Great Lawn and campus atmosphere. New structures not permitted, with the
exception of small recreation-related structures.

◊

WR-7 – Medium-density residential zone on former WRAMC encouraging adaptive
reuse of existing buildings and provision of green space (two to five story maximum,
50% maximum lot occupancy).

◊

WR-8 – Medium-density residential zone on former WRAMC encouraging provision of
green space (five story maximum, 80% maximum lot occupancy).

◊

R-5-B – The eastern portion of the study area, parallel to Georgia Avenue, is zoned R-5-B,
a general residential zone permitting medium-density (maximum lot occupancy of 60%)
single-family dwellings, flats, and apartment buildings.

◊

R-5-A – In the southwestern portion of the study area, land surrounding the intersection of
Aspen Street and 14th Street is zoned R-5-A, a residential zone permitting lower density
(maximum lot occupancy of 40%) single-family dwellings, flats, and apartment buildings.

Page 91

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Development in the study area is regulated by the District of Columbia Zoning Commission
and the BZA. Under the Selected Action Alternative, development of chanceries would be
regulated by the NCPC using the FMA process outlined in the February 2017 MOA between
NCPC and DOS.
The No Action Alternative would not result in a change to land use. Land use at the former
WRAMC would continue to consist of buildings, parking areas, small wooded areas, and mowed
lawn. The long-term presence of a large vacant institutional campus would likely have a negative
effect on the study area by making adjacent residential and commercial areas less desirable.
The Selected Action Alternative would impact the 31.7 acres of land at the former WRAMC by
converting vacant institutional land to active institutional land. The Selected Action Alternative
would likely have a positive effect on other study area land uses by making adjacent residential
and commercial areas more desirable.

3.9.1.2

Future Land Use

Three planning initiatives would affect future land use in the study area:
The Comprehensive Plan for the National Capital (DC Office of Planning, 2006, as amended
in 2011 and 2012) – The plan is divided into two sets of elements—District Elements and Federal
Elements. The District Elements are developed by the DC Office of Planning and the Federal
Elements are developed by NCPC.
The four Federal Elements – workplace, foreign missions, transportation, and the environment –
provide a policy framework for the federal government in managing its operations and activity
in the National Capital Region. The workplace element provides policies for the location and
development, including redevelopment, of federal facilities and directions for federal agencies
and local governments to work together to improve operational efficiencies and the economic
health and livability of communities. The foreign missions element focuses on a policy framework
for the United States in fulfilling its obligations to foreign governments to enable them to find
suitable locations for their diplomatic activities. The transportation element contains policies
for the federal government to develop and maintain a multimodal regional transportation system
that meets the travel needs of residents, workers, and visitors, while improving regional mobility
and air quality through expanded transportation alternatives and transit-oriented development.
The environmental element provides policies for the federal government to develop and operate
properties within the National Capital Region in a manner that preserves, protects, and enhances
the quality of the region’s natural environment.
The District Elements section of the plan divides the District into ten planning areas. The Rock
Creek East planning area encompasses the study area. The master plan focuses on continued
improvements and redevelopment along Georgia Avenue. For the Upper Georgia Avenue/
Walter Reed area, the plan focuses on the development of walkable shopping districts along
Georgia Avenue, organized into commercial “nodes” that support the residential and commercial
communities in the area. Improved transit access to this area is a critical component of the master

Page 92

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

plan. The plan cites the need to incorporate the redevelopment of WRAMC into future land use
planning for the area.
Upper Georgia Avenue Great Streets Redevelopment Plan (DC Office of Planning, 2008) –
This plan outlines the framework for future development and revitalization of Georgia Avenue
from Decatur Street to Eastern Avenue, spurred by the District’s Great Streets Initiative. For the
section of Georgia Avenue abutting the former WRAMC, the plan recommendations are as follows:
◊

Reconnect WRAMC with the community through street activating uses fronting Georgia
Avenue.

◊

Consider construction of a new parking garage wrapped with ground floor retail.

◊

Redevelopment must recognize strict site security requirements of new federal tenants.

◊

New pocket parks and greenways would enhance the look of the corridor and provide
safe pedestrian connections.

◊

Consider relocating Engine Company #22 to the southeast corner of former WRAMC.

Walter Reed Army Medical Center Small Area Plan (Walter Reed DC-LRA, 2013) – This
plan proposes a redevelopment framework for the 66.5-acre portion of the former WRAMC
to be transferred to the DC-LRA (Exhibit 1.7). The plan is being developed as a precursor to
new proposed zoning amendments and development guidelines for the DC-LRA portion of the
former WRAMC.
The DC-LRA plan stresses the importance of maintaining the existing site character, as well as
complementing the adjacent land uses, by creating five horizontally stratified character areas.
These areas are based upon the historic building types and uses, whose location was determined
largely by topography. The reuse plan envisions that these character areas would continue across
the entire campus, encompassing the study area. From north to south, the character areas consist of:
◊

Neighborhood scale (residential density)

◊

City/urban block (maximum density)

◊

Axial; formal

◊

Pastoral/lyrical/open space/park land

◊

Perimeter scale with topographical variety

The plan proposes medium-density residential and mixed use of retail and offices in the eastern
portion of the former WRAMC. The southern portion of the former WRAMC is proposed to

Page 93

Final Environmental Impact Statement

contain more medium-density residential, a proposed charter school, and mixed-use creative. In the
southeastern portion of the campus, below Dahlia Street, the plan proposes a major open space area.
In addition to these initiatives, CNMC is drafting a master facilities plan for their portion of the
former WRAMC, which will include reuse of existing buildings for a medical research campus.
The No Action Alternative would not impact future land use.
The Selected Action Alternative would have a positive effect on future land use by supporting
planned redevelopment at the DC-LRA portion of the former WRAMC, as described in the
Small Area Plan. The FMC would be a large employment center adjacent to the DC-LRA
development. Employees would likely patronize the retail and food service businesses planned
for the DC-LRA development, and some might choose to reside in the planned residential portion
of the development.

3.9.1.3

Community Facilities and Services

Community facilities within the study area consist of two education facilities, six places of
worship, a library, and three recreation areas/parks (Exhibit 3.24). The study area is served by
DC Public Schools; the 45,000-student public school district for the Washington, DC elementary
and middle school facilities are at the Takoma Education Campus on Dahlia Street immediately
to the east of the study area. Coolidge High School, southeast of the study area on 5th Street,
also serves students in the study area (DC Public Schools, 2013).
Emergency service facilities are located outside the study area in the Brightwood community.
Fire protection and Emergency Medical Services are provided by Engine Company #22 at
5760 Georgia Avenue. Police service is provided by the DC Metropolitan Police Department,
District 4 at 6001 Georgia Avenue.

Exhibit 3.24 - Community Facilities
Facility Type

Name

Address

University

Our Lady of Lebanon Maronite Seminary

7164 Alaska Avenue

School

Our Children Infant Care and Pre-School

6640 Georgia Avenue

Place of Worship

St. John of Rila Bulgarian Eastern Orthodox

1629 Van Buren Street

Place of Worship

Shepherd Park Church of God

7239 Georgia Avenue

Place of Worship

New Second Baptist Church

7205 Georgia Avenue

Place of Worship

Our Lady of Lebanon Maronite Catholic Church

7164 Alaska Avenue

Place of Worship

National Spiritual Science Center

1325 Fern Street

Place of Worship

Aum Spiritual Science

1437 Whittier Street

Library

Juanita E. Thomton-Shepherd Park Library

7420 Georgia Avenue

Park

Fort Stevens Recreation Center

1327 Van Buren Street

Park

Marvin Caplan Memorial Park

13th and Holly Streets

Park

Rock Creek Park & Piney Branch Parkway

Klingle Road to DC Line, West of 16th Street

Source: DC Office of the Chief Technology Officer, Geographic Information System, 2012

Page 94

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Parks and recreation facilities in the study area primarily consist of Rock Creek Park, a 2,800-acre
park managed by the National Park Service (NPS). Rock Creek Park contains an extensive
pedestrian/bicycle/horseback riding trail system, playground and picnic areas, tennis courts,
boat rentals, and amphitheater. The park contains historic buildings and exhibits and provides
educational opportunities based on the natural and cultural resources present (NPS, 2013).
Other park and recreation facilities in the study area include a small memorial park and the
Fort Stevens Recreation Center. Facilities at the recreation center include tennis and basketball
courts, baseball fields, and a recreation building.
The No Action Alternative would not impact community facilities and services.
The Selected Action Alternative would not impact education facilities, places of worship,
libraries, or recreation areas/parks. The Selected Action Alternative would impact emergency
response services, which would be responsible for providing emergency service to the FMC. The
Selected Action Alternative would result in approximately 4.9 acres of new publicly available
open space.

3.9.1.4

Security

The WRAMC has been closed to the public since 2001. Security was provided by the U.S.
Department of the Army (DOA) until the property was transferred to DOS in 2015. Existing
security measures consist of gatehouses manned by security personnel and other measures.
Under the No Action Alternative, the property would remain closed to the public and current
security measures would continue. Under the Selected Action Alternative, programmatic
security planning would be developed. It is anticipated that security measures before, during,
and after construction would be different and overlap in some cases. Security requirements
for the individual chanceries would be developed by each chancery and coordinated with the
multijurisdictional authorities, with the ICC used as a security model. The U.S. Secret Service
is responsible for security of foreign missions and security requirements would include Secret
Service patrols of the area.

3.9.2 Visual Resources and Aesthetics
Visual character is a composite description of the visual elements of an area, considering the
form, scale, and diversity of man-made and natural landscape features. Visual sensitivity is
considered as high, moderate, or low based on the potential for the public to discern and tolerate
visual change, considering existing visual quality and based on three interrelated criteria: unity,
intactness, and vividness.
Unity pertains to how well individual elements visually relate to one another—visual unity
is achieved in a landscape when a person can establish a visual connection between every
component within a given viewshed.

Page 95

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Intactness pertains to the integrity of a landscape, or the degree to which the landscape is free
from incongruent features that detract from the otherwise established visual pattern.
Vividness relates to the presence of distinctive landscape features, such as topography, colors,
or patterns that combine to form a striking or memorable visual pattern within the viewshed.
Within the study area, public thoroughfares border the former WRAMC campus on all sides,
providing separation and some buffering between the institutional and surrounding residential
land uses. In general, existing institutional buildings and landscaping are visually compatible
with the adjacent residential development, except along the southern campus boundary where
maintenance facilities, including two tall industrial stacks, conflict visually with residential
areas. The largest institutional buildings are set in the interior of the former WRAMC to reduce
their visibility from residential areas. Rock Creek Park is a visually sensitive area; however, the
topography of the park is such that the former WRAMC is not visible from interior park trails,
with the exception of a portion of the Holly Trail, which runs parallel with 16th Street.
The No Action Alternative would not impact visual resources and aesthetics.
The Selected Action Alternative would have minor impacts on visual resources and aesthetics.
Construction and construction sites are usually considered unattractive and would have a
short-term impact on views from surrounding areas. A visual change could occur for users of
the Rock Creek Park Holly Trail, depending on specific lot development. The former WRAMC
is visible from the Holly Trail across 16th Street, a four-lane arterial roadway. While the design
guidelines for the site emphasize retaining the tree canopy and require a landscaped buffer along
16th Street, views of the former WRAMC from the trail could change, depending on the lot
development on the site’s southwest quadrant (Appendix C).
After the FMC is constructed, views of the site of the former WRAMC from surrounding areas
would be similar to current views of institutional land. The Selected Action Alternative would
be designed to retain historic campus character. Site development would be visually consistent
with current and future adjacent land uses. Specific lot development characteristics would be
dependent upon the lot’s location.

3.10 SOCIOECONOMICS
The analysis of socioeconomics considered the six census tracts within the study area. The
following is a brief description of the demographic characteristics of the study area compared
with the District of Columbia overall.
Current population and labor force trends were identified using data from the U.S. Census Bureau. To
identify potential future population and labor force trends, data were obtained from the Cooperative
Forecasting program administered by the MWCOG. The program publishes a series of forecasts,
or “rounds,” which provide land use activity forecasts for employment, population, and households
by five-year increments, typically covering a 20- to 30-year timeframe (MWCOG, 2013).

Page 96

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Data were compiled using traffic analysis zones, the geographical boundaries used within the
MWCOG employment model. The boundaries are highly similar to census tract boundaries.
Therefore, it was considered methodologically appropriate to present future employment data
using traffic analysis zone boundaries.

3.10.1

Population

The population of the study area and the District of Columbia have grown over the past decade
(Exhibit 3.25). Population grew at a faster rate in the study area (13.5 percent) than in DC overall
(10.8 percent). The study area accounted for 3.8 percent of total population in the District of
Columbia in 2014 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001, 2015).
Based on land availability, planning policies, and regional growth trends, the study area is
projected to experience modest growth between 2015 and 2040 (Exhibit 3.26). Population in
DC is expected to increase by 34 percent over the period and population in the study area is also
projected to grow by 34 percent, reaching approximately 34,415 in 2040 (MWCOG, 2015a).
The population forecasts presume that the federal government, CNMC, and the DC-LRA would
proceed with redevelopment of the former WRAMC; this growth represents approximately 82
percent of the total for the study area. Most of the remaining growth is projected to occur near
the Metro station in Takoma and along Georgia Avenue, consistent with the adopted Small Area
Plans for each location.
EO 13045, Protection of Children from Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks, states
that federal agencies shall make it a high priority to identify and assess environmental health
and safety risks that may disproportionately affect children; and address these risks in their
policies, programs, activities and standards. Approximately 13% of the study area population
(3,108 persons) consists of children, or residents under 18 years of age. In comparison, children
make up approximately 10.9% of the population of the District of Columbia.

Exhibit 3.25 - Population Change 2000-2014
Geographic Area

Population

% Change 2000-2014

2000

2014

Study Area

21,024

23,853

13.5%

The District of Columbia

572,059

633,736

10.8%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2000 and U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 2010-2014

Exhibit 3.26 - Population Projections
Geographic Area

Total Population
2015

Population Projections
2020

2030

2040

Study Area

25,600

27,914

31,202

34,415

The District of Columbia

660,528

715,494

808,718

883,568

Source: MWCOG, 2015

Page 97

Final Environmental Impact Statement

3.10.2

Housing

The study area has a high rate of home ownership in comparison to the District of Columbia
overall (Exhibit 3.27). There is a lower percentage of vacant residences, and a corresponding
higher rate of occupied units in the study area than are found in DC (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015b).
Single-family homes are the largest type of housing in the study area followed by multi-family
housing, while the predominant housing structure in DC is multifamily housing (Exhibit 3.28).
The study area has a higher rate of detached single-family homes than in DC, and a similar rate
of attached single-family homes than in DC (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015b).
Within the study area, the average length of time for residing in the same housing unit exceeds
the District of Columbia, overall. Residents in the study area stay in owner-occupied residences
an average of 17 years (Exhibit 3.29) (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015b).

Exhibit 3.27 - Housing Characteristics, 2014
Occupied Housing Units

Owner-Occupied
Housing Units

Vacant Residences

Study Area

91%

46%

9%

The District of Columbia

89%

42%

11%

Geographic Area

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 2010-2014

Exhibit 3.28 - Housing Units by Structure
Geographic Area

1-Unit, Detatched

1-Unit, Attached

2 Units

3 or More Units

Study Area

31%

23%

1%

45%

The District of Columbia

12%

25%

3%

60%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 2010-2014

Exhibit 3.29 - Median Length of Time in Home (years)
Geographic Area

Housing Units

Owner-Occupied Housing Rented-Occupied Housing
Units
Units

Study Area

12

17

6

The District of Columbia

8

13

6

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey 2010-2014

3.10.3

Economic Activity, Employment and Income

Between 2000 and 2014, the labor force in the study area grew by 20 percent, a slower rate
of growth than in the District of Columbia overall (23 percent) (Exhibit 3.30). The percentage
of the population in the study area not participating in the labor force fell over the decade at a
similar rate as in the District of Columbia. The proportion of the labor force in the study area
employed in the armed forces decreased from 2000–2014 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001, 2015).

Page 98

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The number of employed persons grew in both the study area and the District of Columbia
overall from 2000–2014 (Exhibit 3.31). In 2000, the unemployment rate in the study area was
substantially lower (6.1 percent) than the District of Columbia overall (10.8 percent). By the end
of the decade, the unemployment rate in the study area had risen substantially, due largely to
the national recession of 2007–2009. The District of Columbia unemployment rate, which had
fallen sharply after 2000, rose during the national recession, but remained slightly lower than
at the beginning of the decade. In 2014, the unemployment rate in the study area was slightly
lower than the District of Columbia overall (U.S. Census Bureau, 2001, 2015).
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, overall unemployment in the District of Columbia
decreased in 2015 from 2014 levels (BLS, 2016). While the Bureau of Labor Statistics data
vary in collection methodology from the Census Bureau, the regional trend in unemployment
can be demonstrated.
The District of Columbia Department of Employment Services publishes a list of the top 200
private employers in the District. Exhibit 3.32 shows the 15 largest employers (ranked by size
of workforce) identified by the District of Columbia Department of Employment Services.
Educational institutions and hospitals are the predominant largest non-government employers.
In addition to the organizations listed, District of Columbia Public Schools and the District of
Columbia government are large employers (DCDES, 2017).
The number of jobs in the study area is expected to increase from approximately 8,822 today
to 13,169 in 2040 (MWCOG, 2015a). A sharp drop in employment occurred in the study area
between 2010 and 2015 as federal jobs at Walter Reed Hospital were either repositioned within
or outside the region, or eliminated. However, the MWCOG forecast presumes that most of
these jobs would be replaced in the long run by new jobs on the site of the former WRAMC

Exhibit 3.30 - Labor Force Trends, 2000-2014
Geographic Area

Total: Population
16 Years and Over

In Labor Force: Not in Labor
in Armed Forces
Force

In Labor Force

2000

2014

2000

2014

%
Change

2000

2014

2000

2014

Study Area

17,466

19,461

11,426

13,685

20%

3%

1%

35%

30%

The District of Columbia

469,041

536,771

298,225

367,510

23%

1%

1%

36%

32%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 Census and American Community Survey 2010-2014

Exhibit 3.31 - Employment and Unemployment, 2000-2014
Geographic Area

In Labor Force: Civilian Employed
% Change
2000
2014
2000-2014

In Labor Force: Civilian Unemployed
2000

2014

Study Area

10,219

12,107

18%

6.1%

10.1%

The District of Columbia

263,108

325,838

24%

10.8%

10.6%

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 Census and American Community Survey 2010-2014

Page 99

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.32 - Major Private Employers within the District of Columbia
Business

Description

George Washington University

Higher education

Georgetown University

Higher education

Washington Hospital Center

Medical services

Howard University

Higher education

Fannie Mae

Mortgage finance (government-sponsored enterprise)

Children’s National Medical Center

Medical services

Georgetown University Hospital

Medical services

Howard University Hospital

Medical services

American University

Higher education

Providence Hospital

Medical services

The Washington Post

Media corporation

The Catholic University of America

Higher education

Marriott Hotel Services

Hotel services

Sibley Memorial Hospital

Medical services

The George Washington Hospital

Medical services

Source: The District of Columbia Department of Employment Services

as employment begins to increase from 2015 to 2040, and that additional employment growth
would occur on Georgia Avenue, Kennedy Street, in the Washington Hospital Center complex,
at the Armed Forces Retirement Home, and in other established business districts within the
planning area (Exhibit 3.33).
Median household income in the District of Columbia and the study area is summarized in
Exhibit 3.34. Income is shown in inflation-adjusted 2016 dollars, to allow comparison between
time periods. Median household income in the study area and District of Columbia increased
from 1999–2014. The median income in the study area remains higher than the District overall
(U.S. Census Bureau, 2001, 2015).

Exhibit 3.33 - Employment Projections
Projected
% Change
2015-2020

Total
Employment

Projected
% Change
2015-2030

Total
Employment

Projected
% Change
2015-2040

2040

Total
Employment

2030

Study Area

8,822

11,576

31%

11,833

34%

13,169

49%

The District
of Columbia

814,957

861,814

6%

944,096

16%

1,001,814

23%

Source: MWCOG, 2015

Page 100

2020

Total
Employment

Geographic
Area

2015

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.34 - Study Area Median Household Income, 1999-2014
Median Household Income in
1999 (2016 $)

Median Household Income in
2014 (2016 $)

% Change,
19991-2014

Study Area

$69,794

$76,369

9%

The District of Columbia

$60,241

$71,196

18%

Geographic Area

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 Census and American Community Survey 2010-2014
Note:
1
Income data in the 2000 Census was collected based on respondents’ prior 12-month income or income in 1999.

3.10.4

Tax Revenue

The real property tax rates in the District of Columbia for Fiscal Year 2015-2016 $100.00 of
assessed value are as follows:
◊

$0.85 for residential real property, including multifamily;

◊

$1.65 for commercial and industrial real property, for the first $3 million of assessed value;

◊

$1.85 for commercial and industrial real property, for assessed value more than $3 million;

◊

$5.00 for vacant real property; and

◊

$10.00 for blighted real property (GDC 2012).

The No Action Alternative would not impact socioeconomic resources.
The Selected Action Alternative would have a slight positive impact on population and housing.
The Selected Action Alternative would not present an environmental health or safety risk to
children. The Selected Action Alternative would create a positive impact on employment in the
regional economy. MWCOG employment projections assume FMC redevelopment would occur,
so employment growth due to the FMC is captured within the MWCOG estimates.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in new employment both from the construction of the
FMC and from operation of future chanceries. The jobs associated with the construction of the project
are a one-time impact and do not represent an ongoing change to regional employment, while the
jobs created from chancery operation represent a permanent impact to the regional economy. It is
expected that the overwhelming majority of direct jobs would be filled by foreign nationals either
relocated from current chancery facilities in Washington, DC or not previously residing in the country.
Indirect and induced employment would also result from the Selected Action Alternative. Indirect
employment refers to the number of employees who are not employed by the foreign missions,
but are jobs created or supported as a result of increased demand for goods and services as a
result of the FMC’s economic impact. For example, furniture purchased by a chancery would
be considered an indirect impact of the project. Indirect impacts include induced impacts, which
result when the earnings of construction workers and chancery employees, as well as growth in
earnings at suppliers, lead to further sales for businesses that provide consumer goods and services.

Page 101

Final Environmental Impact Statement

As federal government property leased to foreign missions, chanceries would not generate tax
revenue for the District. However, to the extent that chancery employees support study area
retail businesses or choose to reside within the study area, the FMC would have a slight positive
effect on study area tax revenue.

3.11 MINORITY AND DISADVANTAGED POPULATIONS
EJ is defined by the EPA’s Office of Environmental Justice as:
“…the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless
of race, color, national origin, or income with respect to the development
and implementation of federal actions in accordance with applicable
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. Fair treatment means that
no group of people, including racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic group
should bear a disproportionate share of the negative environmental
consequences resulting from industrial, municipal, and commercial
operations or the execution of federal, state, local, and tribal programs
and policies” (USEPA, 1998).
EO 12898, Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority Populations and
Low-Income Populations, directs federal agencies to take appropriate and necessary steps to
identify and address disproportionately high and adverse environmental effects of federal agency
actions on minority and low-income populations.
For the analysis of populations afforded consideration and protection under EJ, a minority
population is defined as a readily identifiable group or groups of minority persons who live in
geographic proximity. Minority persons include an individual who identifies as a Black or African
American, Hispanic or Latino, Asian or Asian American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Native
Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, or who identifies as a multiracial (two or more races) individual.
For the purposes of EJ analysis, low-income populations were defined as a readily identifiable
group of persons whose income is at or below the poverty level, as determined by the U.S.
Census Bureau, which develops poverty thresholds that are applied to per capita income data,
and used to determine poverty status.
The general methodology for addressing EO 12898 consists of:

Page 102

◊

Identifying thresholds for determining EJ populations within the study area;

◊

Identifying disproportionately high and adverse effects on EJ populations that would
potentially result from the proposed project; and

◊

Determining whether the adverse effects are disproportionate in relation to other
populations within the study area.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The study area for the EJ analysis consisted of 18 census block groups within or immediately
adjacent to the former WRAMC. A block group is a geographic unit of analysis which typically
contains between 600 and 3,000 people (U.S. Census Bureau, 2011). The block groups were
analyzed to identify affected populations and/or EJ-related issues that may not be apparent at
a larger geographic scale.
Minority population data and low-income population data (derived as the percent of total
population living below the corresponding economic poverty level) were obtained from the U.S.
Census American Community Survey five-year average data for 2010-2014.
The Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) guidance calls for identifying EJ populations
where either: 1) the minority population of the affected area exceeds 50 percent, or 2) the
minority population of the affected area is “meaningfully greater” than the minority population
in a larger reference population. Specific thresholds are used to identify “meaningfully greater”
concentrations of minority and low-income residents (CEQ, 1997). For this study, the larger
reference populations were defined as the study area overall, as well as the District of Columbia.
An EJ population was considered to be present in a block group when the percent of minority
residents exceeded 50 percent, or the percent of low-income residents exceeded 12 percent.
These thresholds correspond to the percent of minority and low-income residents found in the
larger reference populations (Exhibit 3.35).
Minority and low-income characteristics of each study area were analyzed to identify geographic
locations that are considered as EJ populations. Through application of the 50 percent minority
population threshold, 17 of the 18 block groups were identified as EJ populations (Exhibit 3.36).
Through the application of the 11 percent below poverty threshold, six of the 18 block groups
were identified as EJ populations. Additionally, of the 18 block groups, six exceeded both the
minority and low-income thresholds.
Of the total population in the study area of approximately 28,853, approximately 22,032 residents
(92 percent) reside in block group areas identified as an EJ population (U.S. Census Bureau, 2015).
EO 13166, LEP requires federal agencies to ensure that they take reasonable steps to provide
meaningful access for LEP individuals.

Exhibit 3.35 - EJ Statistics of Comparable Geographic Units
Percent Minority Population
(ACS1 2010-2014)

Percent Population Below Poverty
Level (ACS 2010-2014)

Study Area

78%

11%

The District of Columbia

58%

18%

EJ Threshold for Analysis

50%

11%

Geographic Area

Source: 1American Community Survey 2010-2014, 5-year Average

Page 103

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Census Tract

Block Group

Total Population

Total Black or African American
(%)

Total American Indian or
Alaskan (%)

Total Asian (%)

Total Native Hawaiian (%)

Total Other Race (%)

Total 2 or more races (%)

Total Minority (%)

Total Hispanic or Latino Origin
(%)

Population1 with Income in the
Past 12 Months

Exhibit 3.36 - Percent Minority and Percent Low Income by Block Group

16

1

1068

68%

0%

1%

0%

0%

3%

72%

5%

6%

16

2

507

69%

0%

0%

0%

0%

10%

78%

0%

4%

16

3

678

80%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

80%

0%

2%

16

4

1,871

76%

0%

0%

0%

1%

1%

78%

6%

1%

17.02

1

1,821

37%

0%

1%

0%

9%

1%

49%

14%

10%

17.02

2

1,154

65%

0%

3%

0%

1%

5%

74%

3%

8%

18.03

1

1,371

66%

0%

2%

0%

7%

11%

87%

10%

11%

18.03

2

2,559

77%

0%

0%

0%

13%

2%

93%

21%

10%

18.04

1

1232

68%

2%

1%

0%

2%

0%

73%

26%

5%

18.04

2

1,634

56%

0%

0%

0%

18%

0%

75%

39%

22%

18.04

3

2,710

55%

0%

0%

0%

19%

2%

76%

42%

14%

19.01

1

1,112

88%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

88%

9%

27%

19.01

2

1048

62%

0%

0%

0%

22%

3%

86%

22%

6%

19.01

3

830

86%

0%

3%

0%

0%

0%

89%

7%

13%

19.01

4

811

71%

0%

8%

0%

1%

0%

80%

8%

3%

103

1

922

40%

1%

7%

0%

2%

5%

54%

4%

6%

103

2

1,221

70%

0%

1%

0%

16%

1%

88%

24%

7%

103

3

1304

60%

0%

0%

0%

17%

5%

82%

27%

40%

Source: American Community Survey 2010-2014, 5-Year Average
Note: 1Population totals used by Census Bureau to calculate % poverty vary slightly from population used to calculate % minority.

For the purposes of this analysis, linguistically isolated households were defined as a household
in which all members 14 years and older speak a non-English language at home and speak
English less than “very well.”
The study area for this analysis consisted of 18 census block groups within or immediately
adjacent to the Walter Reed campus for the analysis of linguistically isolated populations.
Linguistically isolated population data were obtained from the U.S. Census American Community
Survey five-year average data for 2010–2014. The District of Columbia’s linguistically isolated
population is approximately 3.0 percent and the study area’s linguistically isolated population is

Page 104

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

approximately 7.9 percent. Eleven of the 18 block groups were identified as having linguistically
isolated households greater than 3.0 percent (Exhibit 3.37).
EO 12898 defines a disproportionately high and adverse effect upon EJ communities as an effect
that is predominantly borne by, or would be suffered by, an EJ population and that is appreciably
more severe and greater in magnitude than adverse effects suffered by a non-EJ population.
The No Action Alternative would not result in adverse effects to populations afforded consideration
and protection under EJ.
The Selected Action Alternative would not result in adverse effects to populations afforded
consideration and protection under EJ that would exceed those effects predicted to be borne
by non-EJ populations. No disproportionate comparative indirect and cumulative effects of the
proposed action between EJ and non-EJ populations were identified.
An additional focus of EO 12898 and EO 13166 is to solicit meaningful participation of the
public in the project development process, with an emphasis on meaningful exchange with
minority, low-income, and LEP populations. Concerns and issues raised by community members

Exhibit 3.37 - Limited English-Speaking Households by Block Group
Census Tract

Block Group

Linguistically Isolated Households

16

1

0%

16

2

0%

16

3

0%

16

4

0%

17.02

1

4%

17.02

2

1%

18.03

1

27%

18.03

2

14%

18.04

1

5%

18.04

2

8%

18.04

3

18%

19.01

1

0%

19.01

2

4%

19.01

3

4%

19.01

4

5%

103

1

2%

103

2

5%

103

3

16%

Source: American Community Survey 2010-2014, 5-year Average
Note:
A "limited English-speaking household" is one in which no member 14 years old and over (1) speaks only English or (2) speaks a
non-English language and speaks English "very well."

Page 105

Final Environmental Impact Statement

during the scoping process were carefully considered in the development of the Selected Action
Alternative’s elements and potential mitigation strategies. Detailed public outreach activities are
described in Chapter 4: Coordination and Consultation. As the master plan is implemented for
the FMC, DOS is committed to provide outreach to citizens as needed on temporary impacts
resulting from construction activities, such as changes to traffic patterns.

3.12 CULTURAL RESOURCES
The NHPA of 1966 is legislation intended to preserve
Undertaking means a "project, activity,
historical and archaeological sites throughout the United
or program funded in whole or in part
States and its territories. Section 106 of the NHPA, as
under the direct or indirect jurisdiction of
amended, requires that federal agencies review undertakings
a Federal agency, including those carried
out by or on behalf of a Federal agency;
for their impact on significant historic resources. The
those carried out with Federal financial
term historic includes architectural, archaeological, and
assistance; and those requiring a Federal
landscape resources. A significant historic resource is one
permit, license or approval.” [CFR PART
that is either listed or determined eligible for listing on the
800.16 (y)]
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Section 106
also provides an opportunity for the public and the ACHP
to comment on undertakings. The appropriate State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) advises
and assists federal agencies in carrying out their Section 106 responsibilities.
The NRHP is the federally maintained list of properties recognized for their significance in
American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture. The criteria for evaluating
the eligibility of properties for inclusion on the NRHP are established by the Secretary of the
Interior. There are four criteria:
Criterion A – associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad
patterns of our history; or
Criterion B – associated with the lives of significant persons in our past; or
Criterion C – embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,
or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that
represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction; or
Criterion D – has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in history or prehistory.
Parallel to the NRHP are listings that are developed and maintained at the state and local level.
The DC-HPO, which functions as the SHPO for the District of Columbia, maintains the District
of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites. A property can be listed on one or both theNRHP and
the District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites. Acceptance on one does not automatically
result in acceptance on the other.

Page 106

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Both the NRHP and the District of Columbia Inventory list individual properties as well as historic
districts. When a historic district is nominated, the nomination form includes an evaluation of
every structure within the district boundary and identifies each as either a contributing resource
to the historic district or a noncontributing resource. The Section 106 process includes the
evaluation of potential adverse effects on all individually eligible and contributing resources.
Within a historic district, some contributing resources may also be considered as individually
eligible for listing at either the federal or state level.
Prior to the initiation of the current Section 106 process in 2012, a determination of eligibility
was made for a NRHP Historic District encompassing the entire historic WRAMC campus.

3.12.1

Section 106 Process of the NHPA

The Section 106 process for the WRAMC consists
of two parts: the Section 106 process and resultant
Programmatic Agreement (PA) for the Army BRAC
undertaking, and the Section 106 process and projected
PA for the DOS FMC Master Plan undertaking.

A Programmatic Agreement is an
agreement between parties establishing a
program for compliance with Section 106
of the National Historic Preservation Act.

3.12.1.1 Base Realignment and
Closure Commission (BRAC) undertaking
Prior to the initiation of the current study, the closure of the WRAMC under the 2005 BRAC
made that undertaking subject to review under Section 106 of the NHPA. The DOA Section 106
process was initiated in February 2010. An assessment was developed by the Army identifying
the historic resources within the WRAMC (Army Findings Regarding Historic Properties
Present Within the Area of Potential Effect for the Closure and Transfer of Property Out of
Federal Control at Walter Reed Army Medical Center) and consulting parties were identified.
This process included a series of public meetings between March and August 2010. The final
assessment report was issued on November 3, 2011.
The outcome of the Army Section 106 process was a PA executed between the Army, the DC-HPO
and the ACHP (Appendix A). The PA, signed in January 2013, includes a series of stipulations
that take into account the effects of the Army undertaking on the identified historic properties.
The following are the stipulations that relate to aboveground historic properties.
◊

Interim Property Maintenance. Avoid adverse effects to historic properties prior to transfer
of parcels containing historic property by keeping the buildings weather-tight, ventilating
the buildings, maintaining the interior environment between fifty-five (55) and eighty-five
(85) degrees Fahrenheit, and providing physical security and fire protection.

◊

Nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Submit an Application for (DC)
Historic Landmark or Historic District Designation concurrently with a National Register
nomination for the WRAMC Historic District.

Page 107

Final Environmental Impact Statement

◊

Photographic Documentation. Take between 70 and 100 large-format black-and-white
general landscape views of the installation and submit them to the Library of Congress
and the HPO.

◊

Interpretive Materials. Develop a self-guided walking tour with interpretive panels for
portions of the WRAMC that would be accessible to the public after transfer from Army
control.

◊

Existing Conditions Document. Perform existing conditions photography of each principal
façade of each eligible building and select copies (floor plans, facades, roof plans, details
of character defining features) of as-built drawings. A separate report shall be generated
for each historic building and provided to the recipient of historic property at transfer.

◊

Environmental Remediation. In the event that remediation is required prior to transfer
and if historic properties may be affected, the Army shall take actions necessary to assure
protection of human health and the environment and when possible implement measures
to avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse effects on historic properties.

Ownership of the 31.7-acre FMC site was transferred from the Army to DOS in November 2015.
With the completion of the property transfer, the stipulations in the Army PA that pertain to the
DOS FMC property are terminated. A new PA based on the proposed undertaking by the DOS is
being developed and could incorporate certain stipulations from the Army PA that are appropriate
for the new undertaking.

3.12.1.2 FMC Master Plan undertaking

A request to initiate the Section 106 process for the proposed DOS undertaking was issued
formally to the DC-HPO on June 22, 2012. Invitations to become consulting parties to the DOS
Section 106 process were sent to the following parties (who were identified based on the list of
Army Section 106 process consulting parties):

Page 108

◊

District of Columbia Office of Planning – Historic Preservation Office

◊

The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

◊

The National Capital Planning Commission

◊

The U.S. Commission of Fine Arts

◊

Advisory Neighborhood Commission (ANC) 4A

◊

Advisory Neighborhood Commission (ANC) 4B

◊

Brightwood Community Association

◊

The Committee of 100 on the Federal City

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

The District of Columbia Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development

◊

The District of Columbia Office of Planning

◊

The District of Columbia Preservation League

◊

The National Trust for Historic Preservation

◊

Shepherd Park Citizens Association

◊

The Walter Reed Society

◊

Ward 4 Council Member Muriel Bowser

◊

Washington City Administrator

◊

National Park Service – Rock Creek Park

Whereas many of the above parties have responded as willing participants in the scoping process,
to date, the following have been identified as consulting parties to the Section 106 process:
◊

The District of Columbia Office of Planning- Historic Preservation Office

◊

The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

◊

The National Capital Planning Commission

◊

The Committee of 100 on the Federal City

◊

The Alliance to Preserve The Civil War Defenses of Washington (APCWDW)

◊

National Park Service – Rock Creek Park

A public scoping meeting for the DEIS was held on July 19, 2012, and potential effects to cultural
resources were identified as a public and agency concern. Public comments focused on keeping
the chapel, having an open and accessible campus, maintaining the existing landscape buffer
along 16th Street and Alaska Avenue, and addressing traffic impacts.
On January 22, 2013, a meeting was held with DOS, DC-HPO, and the ACHP to review the status
of the project, outline future public participation opportunities, and determine the form of agreement
that would be developed to memorialize stipulations regarding effects to historic resources. Since
the end product of the undertaking would be a master plan used for the development and build-out
of the FMC, the parties agreed that the most appropriate form of agreement to embody mitigation
measures would be a PA as opposed to a MOA. DOS, with DC-HPO, and ACHP, are preparing the
PA for the undertaking and continue to work with and seek input from the other consulting parties.

Page 109

Final Environmental Impact Statement

A public meeting focused on the Section 106 process was held on June 18, 2013. The meeting
outlined the findings regarding the assessment of historic resources, described the proposed
action and presented a preliminary analysis of potential adverse effects of the undertaking on
aboveground historic resources.
The Committee of 100 on the Federal City noted the following:
◊

It may be possible to reuse Buildings 40 and 54 as chanceries.

◊

It may be possible to retain and reuse the residential house(s).

◊

It strongly supports retaining the historic chapel.

◊

The PA should include a stipulation that any major alterations or new construction be
reviewed by the DC Historic Preservation Board.

◊

The Battle of Fort Stevens was fought on and near the former WRAMC.

◊

Interpretive materials and signage should be provided to educate others on the history
of the property from the Civil War to present day.

◊

A social history for the former WRAMC should be prepared to include the modern history
beyond the 1956 period of significance.

The APCWDW noted the following:
◊

There are concerns about the preservation of open space within the FMC.

◊

The former WRAMC was part of the 1864 Battle of Fort Stevens. While the period of
significance for the proposed historic district is 1909–1956, the site is linked to important
historic activities prior to 1909.

◊

Interpretive materials and signage should be provided to educate others on the history of
the property, from the Civil War to present day. The signage should be consistent with
the signs the Army would provide for the portion of the former WRAMC redeveloped
by the DC-LRA.

Consulting party meetings were held on February 26, April 2, May 7, and July 2, 2014; February
23 and May 4, 2017. See Chapter 4.0 Coordination and Consultation for a summary of these
meetings. As a result of these meetings, a draft Assessment of Adverse Effects report and a draft
of a PA were developed (Appendix D). After further consultation with consulting parties and
the public, these documents will be revised to accommodate the change in acreage and other
feedback.

Page 110

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

3.12.2

Historic Resources

Regulations for implementation of the NHPA, as amended, require definition of an area of
potential effects (APE) for federal undertakings affecting historic resources. Per 36 CFR Part
800, Protection of Historic Properties, the APE is defined as “the geographic area or areas
within which an undertaking may directly or indirectly cause changes in the character or use
of historic properties, if such properties exist. The APE is influenced by the scale and nature of
the undertaking and may be different for different kinds of effects caused by the undertaking”
(36 CFR 800.16(d)).
The APE for the aboveground historic resources is comprised of the entire WRAMC facility
and extends approximately 1,250 feet (four city blocks) to the north and west (Exhibit 3.38).
It extends into Rock Creek Park along 16th Street, is bounded to the north by Hemlock Street,
until its intersection with 13th Street. East of 13th Street it is enclosed by Fern Street to Georgia
Avenue in the east and Aspen Street to the south. The latter boundaries (to the east and south)
are the boundaries of the former WRAMC.

3.12.2.1 WRAMC Historic District

Prior to the initiation of the current Section 106 process in 2012, a determination of eligibility
was made for a NRHP Historic District encompassing the entire WRAMC campus. In December
2013, a NRHP nomination was submitted by the Army for consideration by the DC-HPO. A
hearing was held on April 24, 2015 before the DC Historic Preservation Review Board. The
nomination was accepted and the WRAMC Historic District was added to the DC Inventory
of Historic Sites (Exhibit 3.39). The nomination was forwarded to the NPS and added to the
NNRHP in 2015. As accepted, the period of significance for the WRAMC Historic District is
July 11-12, 1864 and 1909-1956. The earlier dates relate to the Civil War Battle of Fort Stevens.
The later period of significance begins in 1909, the opening date of the Main Hospital Building,
and ends in 1956. The end date relates to changes within the military medical structure that
resulted in similar or parallel installations being created elsewhere in the United States. The
boundary of the historic district includes the entire historic campus of the WRAMC, from 16th
Street to Georgia Avenue and from Aspen Street to Fern Street. All structures that existed or
were constructed within the period of significance are considered contributing resources. The
district consists of 41 contributing buildings (32 noncontributing) and 8 contributing structures
(17 noncontributing), as per the accepted NRHP Nomination.

The Battle of Fort Stevens

Fort Stevens, located south of the WRAMC campus between Georgia Avenue NW, 13th Street
NW, Rittenhouse Street NW, and Quackenbos Street NW, was one of a protective ring of forts
that was created around Washington, DC at the start of the Civil War. The Battle of Fort Stevens,
which occurred on July 11-12, 1864, was an engagement between Confederate troops led by
General Jubal A. Early and Union Forces based at Fort Stevens and adjacent forts. While Fort
Stevens is over one-half mile south of the WRAMC site, there was battle activity that occurred
north of what is now Aspen Street, the southern boundary of the historic district.

Page 111

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.38 - Area of Potential Effect for Historic Resources
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Area of Potential Eﬀect

N

0’

Page 112

400’

800’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 3.39 - Historic Resources
Legend
Former WRAMC Campus/
Historic District Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Contributing Resource: Building
Contributing Resource: Landscape
Ineligible Building on FMC Site
Contributing Resource: Fence
Contributing Resource: Gate Post

N

0’

250’

500’

Page 113

Final Environmental Impact Statement

The battle was the result of an attempt by the Confederate Army to capture the Union capital.
Early and his troops approached the city from the north, having looped around from the west and
marching down the Seventh Street Turnpike, now Georgia Avenue NW. The initial engagement
between the forces on July 11th occurred closer to Fort Stevens, south of the WRAMC site; the
Confederate troops had fanned out on both sides of the Turnpike (Georgia Avenue) using the
elevated position of the WRAMC site as a vantage point. At the end of the first day of the battle,
the Confederate picket line was established south of WRAMC, approximately at what is now
Van Buren Street NW. The second day of the battle had significant activity north of that picket
line, particularly around Cameron Creek, which flowed south through the Carberry/Lay Estate
at the southeast corner of the WRAMC site. While the topography of this portion of the site has
been modified since the 1860s, the remnant of the creek survives within the “Rose Garden.”
The battle is the only engagement of the Civil War which occurred within the boundaries of the
national capital. It is also famous as being the only time a sitting U.S. President came under fire
when President Lincoln visited during the battle and, against the advice of his Generals, stood
on the ramparts of Fort Stevens and peered over the parapet. Activities associated with the Battle
of Fort Stevens including Confederate bivouacking, staging, resource procurement, skirmishes
and sharpshooting, Union signaling, and ambushes are documented in several historic accounts
and maps as having occurred on property that became the WRAMC. A reconstructed portion of
Fort Stevens is managed by the NPS as part of the “Civil War Defenses of Washington” which
includes 17 forts and the Battleground National Cemetery located at Georgia Avenue NW and
Whittier Street NW, immediately southeast of the WRAMC. The cemetery is the resting place
of 42 Union soldiers that fought and died in the battle.

History of the WRAMC

Since the WRAMC opened in May 1909, rapid development has occurred on the campus and
in the surrounding neighborhoods. In contrast to the current site density, the setting was rural
when the campus first opened, but rapidly began to urbanize under the demands placed on the
facility and the District of Columbia by World Wars I and II.
Insurance maps from the first decade of the 20th century show the area east of Rock Creek Park
in the northern portion of the District as open with a single paved road, Georgia (or Brightwood)
Avenue, running north-south, and the small “village” of Takoma Park located further east near
Eastern Avenue. The land located between Georgia Avenue and Rock Creek Park was almost
completely undeveloped with the exception of several residential structures. While the future
street grid is shown on the maps, the few roads that existed were unpaved and many of these
roads bisected parcels of privately owned land.
Prior to the WRAMC development of the property, J. D. Cameron was identified as the owner
of a land parcel that extended from Georgia Avenue on the east to 16th Street on the west, with
a boundary south of what became Aspen Street and an angled northern boundary. By 1907, the
eastern portion of Cameron’s property had been divided off and labeled “United States.” This
roughly trapezoidal-shaped property became the site of the Walter Reed General Hospital. The

Page 114

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

initial campus developed rapidly, with Building 1 (Main Hospital) opening in 1909. Within two
years there were nine more brick buildings and a few wood-frame structures.
The period of U.S. engagement in World War I, 1917–1918, saw an explosion of wood-framed
buildings constructed at the hospital. The western property boundary was pushed to 16th Street.
While the northern boundary of the property was officially changed with the city street grid and
sub-divided properties to the north, hospital buildings were already being constructed north of
this boundary. Buildings were constructed on the street grid, particularly Dahlia Street and 13th
Street, but the capacity needs of the hospital were not satisfied within the existing boundary and
further expansion of the property was required.
Maps from the interwar years represent the boundary of the site as it exists today, with the northern
edge extended to Alaska and Fern Avenues. Many of the World War I-era wood-frame structures
were removed during this period, and new brick buildings constructed. The organization of
the campus plan assumed a more picturesque arrangement south of Building 1, focused on the
curvilinear “Main Road.” However, north of Building 1, Dahlia Street established a hard edge
beyond which the city street grid was retained. Significant new buildings constructed during this
period include Building 40/WRAIR (1923 and 1932), Building 41/Red Cross Building (1927
and 1944), and Building 57/Memorial Chapel (1931).
World War II initiated a second period of increased construction. The most intense development
occurred in the northeast corner of the campus, north of Dahlia Street and east of 14th Street.
Tightly spaced hospital wards and barracks filled the site and began to displace the historic street
grid. While Dogwood Street and a portion of 13th Street survived, other streets were interrupted
and became internal circulation pathways. The intensity of the construction activity on the
eastern portion of the site was counterbalanced by the more open, smaller scale development to
the west. Houses used as Officers’ Quarters were located on Dogwood, 14th, and 15th Streets.
These houses were originally located outside the WRAMC boundary and annexed as the property
expanded to the west and north. The separation of the campus from the city street grid was firmly
established during this period.
The most significant construction at the WRAMC between World War II and the end of the
period of significance in 1956 was Building 54, the AFIP, constructed in 1954. While Building
54 was larger in scale and bulkier in mass than older campus buildings, an effort was made to
integrate it with the existing street grid. It was situated facing 14th Street with Dahlia Street to
its south. The site for Building 54 was already occupied by a number of other structures. Five
of these were residential structures which were relocated to the south and west of the Chapel.
The WRAMC Historic District is clearly delineated by a perimeter fence and gates that identify
the boundary of the military installation. While there is a wide range of building types and
architectural styles on the campus, the contributing resources are primarily Colonial Revival and
Georgian Revival styles constructed of red brick with limestone detailing. The development and
expansion of the campus over time was not based on a single master plan; instead, the locations
of buildings and their interrelationship resulted in a campus environment that uses open space

Page 115

Final Environmental Impact Statement

along with vehicular and pedestrian pathways as organizing elements. The growth and ongoing
redevelopment of the campus resulted in key buildings acting as focal points and contributing
resources providing the connective tissue. However, the development activity at the site has been
regular over the almost 100-year history as an active installation (1909-2005) with significant
increases in demolition and new construction focused around military activity overseas (World
Wars I and II, Korea, Vietnam, the Gulf War, Iraq, and Afghanistan). The property as it exists
today represents the full history of development at the WRAMC, with significant changes having
occurred after the end of the period of significance in 1956.

Historic Significance of WRAMC

The WRAMC Historic District has been added to the DC Inventory of Historic Sites and the
NRHP due to its significance in the field of military medicine (Criterion A) and its architecture
and design (Criterion C). The Walter Reed General Hospital, one of the oldest general military
hospitals in the country, has played a key role in the treatment and rehabilitation of America’s
soldiers in all major U.S. conflicts since World War I. The Army Medical School has been
responsible for training Army physicians in military medicine and public health and advancing
military medical care through research. The AFIP is internationally renowned for its research
on pathology and the study of disease.
The core institutions that became the WRAMC date to the 19th century. In 1862, Surgeon
General William A. Hammond first conceived of the need for a military medical reservation in
the District of Columbia, including a permanent hospital, a medical school to train the Army’s
surgeons, and a medical museum. His concerns were fueled by the unprecedented needs posed
by the Civil War. While Hammond’s overall plan was not approved, the Army Medical Museum
and Library was established in 1862 and located downtown. The museum was established to
reduce the loss of life in warfare through the scientific study of medical specimens.
The second component of what became the WRAMC was the Army Medical School. In 1893,
the War Department issued an order calling for the establishment of an Army Medical School in
the District of Columbia. The mission of the school was to provide specialized training for newly
commissioned doctors prior to their entrance into the medical corps. It was initially located in
the same facility downtown as the museum and library.
The final WRAMC component established was the General Hospital. In 1898 the post hospital
at the Washington Barracks (present-day Fort McNair in southwest Washington, DC) was
designated as the Army General Hospital. The Commander of the General Hospital from 1898
to 1907 was Colonel William C. Borden, who became the driving force behind the consolidation
of the hospital and training facilities at the future WRAMC. While Colonel Borden proposed
a fully consolidated campus including the hospital, medical school, and museum, the initial
appropriations limited the campus to just the hospital in 1909. The rapid development of WRAMC
over the next 50 years resulted in a campus that fulfilled and eventually surpassed Borden’s
original vision, incorporating both medical care and research facilities that were at the forefront
of 20th century advances in the medical field.

Page 116

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

WRAMC Historic District Contributing Resources

Contributing Resources within the boundary of the proposed FMC:

Building 40 – WRAIR. Building 40 consists of three components constructed under different
building campaigns. The south wing was constructed in 1923, the center and north wings in
1932, and the west wing in 1962. Originally constructed to house the Army Medical School, it
was designated as WRAIR in 1955. Many of the most important medical advances associated
with the WRAMC were researched in this building. The building is eligible under Criterion A
for its critical role in the history of the WRAMC and Criterion C as an excellent example of
classical revival architecture that contributes to the coherence of the campus and the historic
district. In addition to the exterior of the building, some interior spaces including the lobbies,
the auditorium, and the public corridors have been identified as character-defining features of
the building.
Building 41 – Red Cross Building. The first section of Building 41 was constructed in 1927
with the addition of a solarium on the south side in 1944. Building 41 was the location for
many social and recreational functions for the patients at WRAMC. Many nationally famous
entertainers performed on the stage in the main hall. Building 41 is eligible under Criterion A
due to its association with the development of the post and Criterion C as a significant example
of the Colonial Revival style which contributes to the overall campus and the historic district.
Building 57 – Memorial Chapel. Memorial Chapel was constructed in 1931 with funding raised
by the Red Cross Gray Ladies. This is the only structure that was built on the campus devoted
solely to religious use. In addition to being constructed within the period of significance, the
building is eligible under Criterion A as a critical part of the development of the campus and
for its connection to the larger community. It is also eligible under Criterion C as a significant
example of English Country Gothic style design. In addition to the exterior of the building,
there are interior elements that have been identified as character-defining features including the
stained glass windows.
Buildings 19, 21, 22, 25, 26, 29, 29A, 30, and 35 – Officers' Quarters. These eight residential
structures (and one garage, 29A) located on the west side of the campus were constructed circa
1915–1919. They were constructed outside the WRAMC but were annexed as the post expanded
to the north and west. Three of the structures remain on their original sites (21, 25, and 29).
The other five structures were originally located east of 14th Street between Dahlia and Fern
Streets. They were relocated to their current sites in 1954 as Building 54 was being constructed.
These buildings are contributing elements to the historic district and eligible under Criterion A
as representative of the development of the WRAMC campus.
Perimeter Fence – The former WRAMC is organized similarly to most military installations.
The perimeter boundary of the post is identified by a fence or barrier with entry points signified
by gates. The perimeter fence at the WRAMC extends around the entire installation and has been
modified over time to accommodate new programmatic needs and technologies. Two lengths
of the perimeter fence have been identified as a contributing element as part of the cultural

Page 117

Final Environmental Impact Statement

landscape. The first consists of the fence from the southwest corner of the site, at the intersection
of 16th Street and Aspen Street, north along 16th Street, northeast on Alaska Avenue between
16th Street and Fern Street, and east on Fern Street to the 13th Street gate. The second starts
at the southeast corner of the site at the intersection of Georgia Avenue and Aspen Street and
extends north to a point between Butternut and Dahlia Streets. Fence posts at the 16th Street
entry date to 1924 and those at the Georgia Avenue and Aspen Street entries date to 1942. Iron
fencing around the facility dates to circa 1940–1942. The perimeter fence is significant under
Criterion A for its association with the development of the WRAMC and Criterion C for its
design as part of the architectural character of the overall campus.
The portion of the perimeter fence from the north side of the 16th Street NW gate to immediately
beyond the 14th Street NW gate on Alaska Avenue NW is within the boundary of the proposed
FMC. The remainder of the fence is outside the FMC boundary.
Contributing Resources outside the boundary of the proposed FMC:
Building 1 – Main Hospital. The oldest section of the Main Hospital is in the Georgian Revival
style and dates to 1909. It has been expanded with additions on all but the south-facing façade.
The additions were made to expand the patient, medical, and administrative capacities of the
building. Building 1 is eligible under Criterion A for contributions to the military and medicine
and most of the additions, as well as the original structure, are eligible under Criterion C for
their architecture and design within the Georgian Revival architectural style and period.
Building 7 – Barracks. Constructed in 1910 as men’s barracks, this building is part of the original
core of the campus along with the Main Hospital. This building is eligible under Criterion A
as part of the development of the WRAMC and under Criterion C as an example of Georgian
Revival design which contributes to the overall campus and the historic district.
Building 8 – Officer Quarters 1. Constructed in 1910 as officer housing, this building is part
of the original core of the campus along with the Main Hospital. This building is eligible under
Criterion A as part of the development of the WRAMC and under Criterion C as an example
of Colonial Revival design which contributes to the overall campus and the historic district.
Building 9 – Officer Quarters 2. Constructed in 1910 as officer housing, this building is part
of the original core of the campus along with the Main Hospital. This building is eligible under
Criterion A as part of the development of the WRAMC and under Criterion C as an example
of Colonial Revival design which contributes to the overall campus and the historic district.
Building 11 – Delano Hall. The original portion of Delano Hall is the east wing, dating to 1929.
It was expanded with the center section in 1931 and the west wing in 1933. Built to house nurses,
the building is dedicated to Jane A. Delano, Superintendent of the Army Nurse’s Corps and
leader in Red Cross nursing. The building is significant under Criterion A as representative of
installation support functions and nursing quarters. Building 11 is also eligible under Criterion
C for its architecture and design within the Georgian Revival architectural style and period.

Page 118

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Building 12 – Army Nurse Corps Home. Constructed in 1911, Building 12 was the first
dedicated housing on post for nurses. This building is eligible under Criterion A as part of the
development of the WRAMC and Criterion C as an example of Georgian Revival design which
contributes to the overall campus and the historic district.
Building 15 – Central Heating Plant. The Central Heating Plant was constructed in three primary
phases: 1918, 1919, and 1977. The structure is significant under Criterion A as representative of
the development of the WRAMC campus.
Building 17 – Doss Memorial Hall. Doss Memorial Hall was constructed in 1920 and added to
in 1944. Originally the Catholic Service Club, later uses include the Services Club, PX Cafeteria,
and Hostess House. It most recently served as a guest house for wounded soldiers and their
families and also contained the Army Community Services Center. Building 17 is eligible under
Criterion A as it is significant in the area of military community service function. It is eligible
under Criterion C as an example of Colonial Revival style.
Building 31 – Oil Storage Warehouse. The Oil Storage Warehouse was constructed in
three primary phases: 1921, 1941, and 1971. The structure is significant under Criterion A as
representative of the development of the WRAMC campus.
Building 38 – Guard House. Building 38 was originally constructed as a guard house and
modified to accommodate other programmatic uses over time. The first section was constructed in
1922 with additions in 1928, 1944, 1992, and 2004. The structure is significant under Criterion A
as representative of the development of the WRAMC campus.
Building 52 – Hospital Ward. This hospital ward, constructed in 1930, is the last extant example
of a building type that was once plentiful at the WRAMC as well as many other hospitals
constructed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Long and thin in plan with arcaded verandas
on three sides, these buildings provided both isolation for the wards as well as abundant air and
light. The architecture embodies the advancing scientific concepts of the medical profession.
This structure is eligible under Criterion A as the surviving example of a building type that was
critical to the development history of the campus and Criterion C as an example of Georgian
Revival design which contributes to the overall campus and the historic district.
Building 53 – Post Theater. The Post Theater was constructed in 1950 and is eligible under
Criterion A as representative of the development of the WRAMC campus.
Building 54 – AFIP. The main block of the AFIP was constructed in 1955 with an addition to
the south added outside the period of significance in 1972. An excellent example of Cold War-era
design, the facility housed research activities that were at the cutting edge of the period. This
building expands the architectural language of the campus to include the “modern” vocabulary. The
building is eligible under Criterion A as the first structure built by the unified Armed Forces, and an
internationally important facility for research into the causes, processes, and effects of disease. It

Page 119

Final Environmental Impact Statement

is eligible under Criterion C as an example of “Brutalist” concrete construction in an institutional
setting and for the board-formed patterning of the concrete façades.
Building 82 – PX Gas Station. Building 82 was originally the PX Gas Station. It was constructed in
1940 with a two-bay addition in 1958. The structure is significant under Criterion A as representative
of the development of the WRAMC campus.
Building 84 – Equipment Shed. The equipment shed was constructed in 1942. The structure is
significant under Criterion A as representative of the development of the WRAMC campus.
Building 90 – Post Fire Station. The post Fire Station was constructed in 1946 with an addition
in 1995. The structure is significant under Criterion A as representative of the development of the
WRAMC campus.
Main Drive. The Main Drive was created in three episodes, all within the period of significance.
The portion from the Butternut Street entry to Building 1 was part of the original site development
in 1909. The portion of Main Drive from Building 1 to Building 17 was constructed during the WWI
expansion in 1918, while the remaining portion that extended it to the 16th Street entry, including
the circle in front of Building 17, was added in 1933. The Main Drive is significant under Criterion
A for association with the WRAMC and its integration of landscape, views, buildings, vehicular
and pedestrian circulation, and landscape features within the installation’s overall Georgian Revival
style. The drive contributes to the historic district as part of the cultural landscape.
The portion of Main Drive from the 16th Street NW gate to “Ambulance Drive” (the interior
street that runs between Buildings 1 and 41) forms the southern boundary of the proposed FMC.
The property line is the curb on the northern side of Main Drive. One exception to this is at the
ellipse where 14th Street NW intersects with Main Drive. The northern half of the ellipse is
within the FMC boundary.
Landscape Elements. Structure 60, the ellipse in front of Building 1 that encircles the Hoff
Memorial Fountain, is a contributing element to the historic district. The ellipse was part of
the initial 1909 construction with the fountain, pavements, and urns added in 1935. The extant
fountain is a circa-1994 replica that is not a contributing element, falling outside the period
of significance. The ellipse, urns, steps, and landscaping are eligible under Criterion C as
contributing elements to the District as part of the cultural landscape.
The landscape and elements south of Building 1 and the viewshed within the area are also
contributing elements as part of the cultural landscape. The elements include Structure 44/
Pergola, Structure 45/Bandstand, Structure 46/Rose Garden Fountain, walkways, cherry trees
and the sunken garden, stairs leading down to the area, and garden objects that date from 1920
to 1956. The area and elements have been used for military and medical ceremonies, as well as
for recreational and therapeutic functions.

Page 120

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

3.12.2.2 Rock Creek Park

A portion of Rock Creek Park is located within the APE immediately to the west of the WRAMC.
Rock Creek Park was established in 1890 as one of the first federal parks. The park encompasses
public reservation 339 which includes the rim and gorge of Rock Creek from the District of
Columbia boundary to the Potomac River, including a short segment along the river. The property
varies in width from a few feet at the southern end to more than 500 feet near the northern end.
The park includes a trail network through the environs, much of which follows historic bridle
trails. It also incorporates industrial structures, with the earliest dating to 1828. The Rock Creek
Park Historic District is significant under Criterion A for community planning and development
as well as recreation and Criterion C for the landscape architecture and engineering. This historic
district was listed on the NRHP in 1991, with a period of significance between 1791 and 1941.
Within the APE, both Sherrill Drive and the trail system are identified as contributing resources
to the Rock Creek Park Historic District.

3.12.3
Effects to Historic Resources
No Action Alternative

The No Action Alternative would not directly affect historic resources. Over time, the No Action
Alternative would result in the continued deterioration of the historic resources, resulting in an
adverse effect.

Selected Action Alternative

While the property that is proposed to be used as the FMC is comprised of just a portion of the
historic WRAMC campus, the primary historic resource against which effects must be evaluated
is the entire historic district. During coordination with consulting parties and the DC-HPO,
it has been emphasized that effects must be considered for the historic district as a whole. A
comprehensive evaluation process of the contributing resources within the FMC boundary was
performed by DOS including an existing condition analysis, adaptability for renovation and
repurposing as chanceries, and market analysis of potential reuse. This process was focused
on avoiding and minimizing adverse impacts on historic buildings through reuse. The results
of these studies and analyses were shared with the public through open houses and consulting
party meetings.
The Selected Action Alternative proposes some definitive actions that would result in adverse
effects on historic resources, as well as potential actions where the effect would be dependent on
whether DOS finds foreign mission partners that are interested in renovating a historic resource
for a new programmatic use. The residential properties at the western portion of the site (Buildings
19, 21, 22, 25, 26, 29, 29A, 30, and 35) have been identified for removal. Buildings 40 and
41 will be offered to potential lessees with the objective that they will be renovated. Building
57 will be retained and repurposed with DOS retaining control of the building. The perimeter
fence and gates will be retained, although some modifications may be required to accommodate
current functional requirements.

Page 121

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Under the Selected Action Alternative, the “worst-case scenario” is that of the contributing
resources within the FMC boundary, only Building 57 and the perimeter fence would be retained.
The following evaluation is based on this scenario.

Rock Creek Park

The Selected Action Alternative would have no direct adverse effect on Rock Creek Park. The
Selected Action Alternative retains the configuration of the WRAMC at the western boundary
along 16th Street adjacent to Rock Creek Park. The existing historic perimeter fence and gate
would be retained and the boundary reinforced with a landscaped buffer along 16th Street and
Alaska Avenue. Access to Rock Creek Park would not be restricted during construction or
operation of the proposed FMC.
The Selected Action Alternative may have an indirect adverse effect on Rock Creek Park. The
redevelopment of the FMC site by DOS (and the remainder of the WRAMC by other entities)
will attract many new visitors to the property that may cross 16th Street NW to enter Rock Creek
park. While Sherrill Drive, located directly across from Aspen Street, offers vehicular access
to the park, it is narrow and not safe for use by pedestrians except on weekends and holidays
when it is closed to vehicular traffic. The closest pedestrian trailhead access points to the Park
are three blocks north (at Holly Street) and two blocks south (at Whittier Street). Lacking a safe
entry point, some pedestrians may create unauthorized “social” trails through the woods which
may lead to erosion and other damage to the park resources.

WRAMC Historic District

Implementation of the Selected Action Alternative would result in an adverse effect to the
WRAMC Historic District. The integrity of a historic district is based on the setting, design, and
association of the component parts. These are linked to the identifiable boundary, the arterial
system within the campus, and the surviving resources constructed between 1909 and 1956.
The boundary and arterial system would be retained and reinforced as part of the proposed
undertaking. The Selected Action Alternative would retain and reinforce the primary vehicular
artery of Dahlia Street (east-west). The section of 14th Street north of Dahlia Street would be
moved approximately 30 feet to the east, and 14th Street between Main Drive and Dahlia Street
would be modified to incorporate a landscaped median element that will also serve as a bioswale.
North of Dahlia Street, 14th Street would terminate in a cul-de-sac centered on Building 54. The
Alaska Avenue gate would be closed to vehicles, although pedestrian and bicycle access would
be maintained. While these are changes from the internal road system that existed in 1956, they
are in keeping with the changes that occurred throughout the period of significance and are not
considered an adverse effect to the historic district.
The majority of noncontributing structures within the FMC project boundary would be removed to
provide lots for new construction. Noncontributing Buildings 20, 32, and 56 may be reused, depending
on interest from foreign missions. The siting, massing, and general design approach to new construction

Page 122

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

will be guided both by the guidelines issued by the DC-HPO for new construction in a historic district
and specific design guidelines that have been developed for the master plan (Appendix C).
Removal of the residential structures on the west portion of the campus will have both a direct
adverse effect, the loss of contributing resources, and an indirect adverse effect on the overall
historic district. Removal would eliminate the buildings' historic location, setting, design
materials, workmanship, feeling, and association with other historic district buildings. These
buildings were not purpose built for WRAMC; they were absorbed as the campus grew and
utilized as Officers’ Housing. There is limited visual connection between these buildings and
the core of the historic district, Building 1 (the Main Hospital), but they do represent an aspect
of the history and development of the WRAMC.
The potential loss of Buildings 40 and 41 would be both a direct adverse effect, the loss of
contributing resources, and the direct adverse effect on the overall historic district. Removal would
eliminate the buildings’ historic location, setting, design materials, workmanship, feeling, and
association with other buildings within the historic district. While the history of the development
of the WRAMC campus was mostly organic, driven by needs during periods of international
conflict, the one planned formal arrangement on the campus that has survived is the relationship
between Buildings 1, 40, and 41. The landscaped open space that was formed by these three
buildings has been lost with the insertion of new buildings, but the loss of Buildings 40 and 41
would adversely affect the reading of the campus plan as it was developed between the World Wars.
The Selected Action Alternative provides for the reuse of Building 57/Memorial Chapel, but
may have an adverse effect on the resource. The programmatic use of the facility has not
been finalized. Prior to reuse, modifications would be required to comply with building code,
incorporate programmatic needs, and provide necessary support spaces (toilet rooms, kitchenette,
etc.). These modifications could have an adverse effect on character-defining features. Removal
or replacement of features could have an adverse effect on the materials and workmanship of
the resource.
The Selected Action Alternative may result in an adverse effect to the perimeter fence. Under
the 14th Street cul-de-sac option, the Selected Action Alternative retains the perimeter fence on
16th Street and Alaska Avenue within the project area boundary. Existing gates and gate posts at
Main Drive (north side of the gate), Dahlia Street, and 14th Street would remain in their current
locations. Under the 14th Street through-street option, the perimeter fence on Alaska Avenue
would be altered to align the intersection, resulting in an adverse impact.
The Selected Action Alternative would have no adverse effect on Main Drive. The Selected Action
Alternative includes curb cuts to the northern edge of Main Drive for access to new construction.
The configuration and detailing of the north side of Main Drive would not be changed.

Mitigation Strategies

Meetings are being held with the DOS, DC-HPO, the consulting parties, and the ACHP to identify
mitigation strategies and incorporate these into the PA.

Page 123

Final Environmental Impact Statement

As part of the FMC Master Plan a set of design guidelines have been developed that are specific
to the FMC development (Appendix C). These guidelines will work in coordination with the
standard design guidelines that have been established by the DC-HPO for the renovation of
contributing buildings or the construction of new buildings within a historic district.
DOS will be responsible for the design and implementation of the infrastructure upgrades
necessary to create the FMC and ready individual sites for development. The development of
the infrastructure upgrades will be reviewed through the standard federal design review process,
including formal review by both the CFA and the NCPC. Public input will continue throughout
this process.
Design review of the individual site developments by foreign missions will be undertaken by
NCPC using the process established by the FMA.
As part of the development plan for the FMC, DOS is offering both Buildings 40 and 41 for
reuse. This effort includes the development of marketing materials that will be made available
to interested foreign missions. Removal of these buildings will be delayed as much as possible
within the overall development sequence of the FMC.
Mitigation strategies for historic buildings that are demolished may include documentation of the
buildings prior to removal including historic research, drawings, and photographs in accordance
with EO 11593. This effort would build upon the documentation effort that was undertaken by
the DOA under their PA.
DOS will coordinate with the NPS on improvements for directional signage along 16th Street
NW regarding access, vehicular and pedestrian, to Rock Creek Park.

3.12.4

Archaeological Resources

The APE for archaeological resources is comprised of the 31.7 acres transferred to DOS at the
northwest corner of the 115-acre WRAMC facility. It is bound to the west by 16th Street NW, to
the northwest by Alaska Avenue NW, to the north and east by buildings of the former WRAMC,
and to the south by Main Drive. The latter three boundaries (to the north, east, and south) are
within the former WRAMC.
Seven known archaeological sites with prehistoric components are mapped within approximately
2,500 feet of the APE, all within Rock Creek Park. Due to these factors, undisturbed areas were
considered to have a high probability for prehistoric and later archaeological deposits. A Phase
IA investigation was undertaken to determine the extent of area with archaeological potential
within the property.
The Phase 1A archaeological investigation was conducted and a Memorandum of Findings submitted
in September 2016 to the DC-HPO. Secondary source material was reviewed to develop a plan for
subsurface inspection of open spaces to assess the level of disturbance to the natural and cultural

Page 124

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

stratigraphy and determine the presence of or likelihood for paleosols that could contain buried
prehistoric archaeological deposits. The goal of the Phase 1A investigation was to assess the
potential for the property to contain archaeological resources eligible for listing on the NRHP.
The intersection of north-south-running 14th Street and east-west-running Dahlia Street serves
to divide the APE into quadrants. Research and observations suggested that the eastern quadrants
are largely disturbed, but undeveloped areas could still contain intact archaeological deposits.
The northwest quadrant contains only two buildings, Building 21 (Officers' Quarters #7) and
Building 57 (Memorial Chapel). The area between the rear of the buildings, Dahlia Street, and
Alaska Avenue was identified as potentially containing paleosols, or buried soil strata, which
have the potential to contain evidence for prehistoric human activity. Approximately 75 percent
of the southwest quadrant was considered to have the potential for containing paleosols.
While there was activity throughout the period of the Civil War across the District of Columbia
region, there was only one engagement of Union and Confederate forces that took place within
the boundary of the District. The Battle of Fort Stevens occurred over an area that includes the
WRAMC (Exhibit 3.40). Fort Stevens is located approximately one-half mile south of the site.
This battle is significant for its location within the boundary of the national capitol, the direct
involvement of the President, and that both Union and Confederate soldiers were killed and laid
to rest in the vicinity of the battle.
Development and modifications at the WRAMC and in the surrounding neighborhood have
significantly changed the appearance of the area from the time of the Battle of Fort Stevens.
The topography of the WRAMC has been systematically modified over the last century as
buildings, roadways, and other features were constructed, moved, and demolished. The creeks
have disappeared with the line of Cameron Creek becoming the location of the primary storm
drainage line running through the site, known as the “Luzon Tunnel.”
While development has altered the site of the battle, there have been artifacts recovered from the
WRAMC site in the intervening years from the Civil War era. There is no clear documentation
regarding where on the site the artifacts were recovered.
The results of the Phase 1A investigation indicated that soil profiles throughout roughly two-thirds
of the study area have been graded, cut, or otherwise truncated and have no potential to contain
in-situ cultural material. This includes the entire NE and SE quadrants with the exception of the
narrow strip of lawn between Building 40 and 14th Street NW.
In the SW quadrant, the northern edge of the quadrant, abutting Dahlia Street, has been entirely
cut and graded in the course of more recent construction, negating the potential for the presence
of cultural material. The same is true for the low-lying southern third of the quadrant, which has
been cut and graded to the surface of weathered bedrock.

Page 125

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.40 - Intact Soils with Potential to Contain Archaeological Resources
Legend
Former WRAMC
Campus Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Civil War Picket Line
Prehistoric Settlements
(Eastern Edge)
Intact Soils
Disturbed Soils

N

0’

Page 126

250’

500’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Intact soils with the potential to contain cultural material in the upper profile were identified
throughout the NW quadrant and across the central portion of the SW quadrant. The intact soil
profiles in these areas have the theoretical potential to contain both prehistoric and cultural
material, spanning the entire time range of human activity in the region, and historic material.
A Phase 1B archaeological study was conducted in June 2017 in the undisturbed NW and SW
quadrant areas where construction or other surface disturbance may take place. The shovel test
pit (STP) and metal-detector survey identified one archaeological site and two isolated finds
(ISFs). ISF 1 refers to a Minié ball and a Type III Williams Cleaner bullet recovered from
an STP located near a house at the edge of the ridgetop, while ISF 2 was located during the
metal-detector survey in an open area surrounded by buildings. ISF 1 and ISF 2, by definition,
are not eligible for listing in the NRHP.
Fired bullets and other artifacts recovered from the topsoil were recorded as site 51NW261.
Minié balls collected on the site appear associated with the Battle of Fort Stevens, and probably
with the July 12, 1864, Union assault on Confederate forces. All Minié balls were recovered
within 0.5-foot (0.15-m) of the surface, and most were recovered within 0.3 foot (0.9-m) of the
ground surface. No cultural features were encountered. Given the absence of Civil War features,
the near-surface context of all Minié balls recovered during the survey, and the existence of
extensive historical record on the Battle of Fort Stevens, additional archaeological excavation
appears unlikely to add important new information about the battle, the Civil War, or the history
of Washington, D.C. Therefore, DOS recommended site 51NW261 not eligible for listing on the
NRHP. The results of the Phase 1B investigation were submitted to the DC-HPO in November
2017.
The No Action Alternative would not affect archaeological resources.
The Selected Action Alternative is unlikely to affect archaeological resources based on the
results of the Phase 1B investigation. However, if unanticipated discoveries occur during the
construction phase, DOS will appropriately identify, assess and, if necessary, mitigate adverse
impacts to the resource. DOS will include language in the lease agreements with foreign missions
to manage unanticipated discoveries in accordance with federal law. Stipulations will be included
in the PA for the treatment and identification of unanticipated discoveries within the APE. DOS
will retain and display the recovered artifacts at the Memorial Chapel on the FMC campus.
The project area is within the battlefield core of identified resource DC001 (Battle of Fort
Stevens), but outside the potential NRHP boundary of the battlefield. The Civil War Sites
Advisory Commission determined that for this resource "those portions of the battlefield owned
by the NPS retain integrity. All other areas have been altered beyond recognition since the
period of significance due to intense growth of the surrounding metropolitan area." As such,
the study area is not within the NRHP eligible boundary for this resource. In addition, no
indirect adverse visual effects are present for this resource because the setting is already urban.
DOS has concluded that no effect on this resource would result from the implementation of the
Selected Alternative.

Page 127

Final Environmental Impact Statement

3.12.5

Traditional Cultural Properties

A traditional cultural property can be defined as one that is eligible for inclusion in the NRHP
because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that, (a) are
rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural
identity of the community (NPS, 2014). No known traditional cultural properties exist in the
study area.
The No Action and the Selected Action Alternatives would not affect traditional cultural properties.

3.13 PETROLEUM TANKS AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
The primary regulations that apply to petroleum and other potentially hazardous substances in
the study area are:
◊

The RCRA addresses the control of hazardous waste from “cradle-to-grave,” including
the generation, transportation, treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous waste. RCRA
establishes the framework for the management of non-hazardous solid wastes. The 1986
amendments to RCRA established requirements concerning environmental issues caused
by underground tanks storing petroleum and other hazardous substances.

◊

The Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 addresses the use and disposal of specific
chemicals, including PCBs (40 CFR Part 761), asbestos (40 CFR Part 761), and lead-based
paint (LBP) (40 CFR Part 745).

3.13.1

Petroleum Storage Tanks, Electrical Generators, and
Hydrochloric Acid Storage Tank

The EPA and the District of Columbia have regulations pertaining to underground storage tanks (UST):
◊

40 CFR Part 280: Technical Standards and Corrective Action Requirements for Owners
and Operators of USTs.

◊

The District of Columbia Municipal Regulation Title 20, Chapters 55–70.

Existing Petroleum Storage Tanks

There is one registered UST and four aboveground storage tanks (ASTs) remaining on the former
WRAMC (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2010, 2015), as described below. Tanks have secondary
containment and are monitored by a 24-hour service for leaks.

Page 128

◊

MP-16 is a 200-gallon diesel double-wall steel belly AST located directly underneath
the emergency generator for Building 20; the tank was installed in 1997.

◊

MP-17 is an 84-gallon diesel double-wall steel belly AST located directly under the
emergency diesel generator for Building 32; the tank was installed in 2002.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

MP-30 is a 6,000-gallon diesel fiberglass reinforced plastic UST located west of Building
54. The tank is associated with a generator located in the basement of Building 54 and was
installed in 1996. The tank is currently out of service and will be removed in accordance
with 40 CFR 280.

◊

Unnamed 1 is a125-gallon diesel AST for a generator in the mechanical room of Building T-2.

◊

Unnamed 2 is a 100-gallon diesel double-wall steel AST formerly used for a generator
in Building T-2 that has been decommissioned.

Historical Petroleum Storage Tanks

According to the DOA and DC Underground Storage Tank Program Letters of Permanent Tank
Closure, USTs MP-4, MP-8, MP-9, MP-31, and MP-32 have been removed from the former
WRAMC in accordance with DC laws and regulations (U.S. Army Garrison..., 2006a, 2007,
2010, and 2015). These documents state that observations and laboratory testing indicated there
was no evidence that the tanks had leaked and none of the excavated soil had to be managed as
contaminated soils (Exhibit 3.41). The tank closure documents do not indicate groundwater was
encountered during excavation of the USTs.

Exhibit 3.41 - Summary of Former Storage Tanks
Tank Identifier

Tank Capacity
(Gallons)

Product Stored

Removed

Location

Documentation
of DDOE Closure
Available for
Review1

MP-4

2,500

Diesel

Dec-1997

East of Building T-2

Yes

MP-8

6,000

Diesel

Aug-1996

West of Building 54

Yes
Yes

MP-9

3,000

Diesel

Dec-1997

Between Buildings
T-2 and 41

MP-31

1,000

Diesel

Jan-2007

Between Buildings
T-2 and 41

Yes

MP-32

3,000

Diesel

Jan-2007

East of Building T-2

Yes

Unnamed 3

500

Hydrochloric Acid

1999

Building 14

Yes

Note: 1Sufficient documentation of DDOE inspection during tank removal, tank disposal, closure assessment soil testing, and the DDOE letter of
permanent closure are available.

Historical Hydrochloric Acid UST

A UST (Unnamed 3) used for storage of hydrochloric acid was formerly located at the northeast
end of Building 41 (Exhibit 3.42). The hydrochloric acid is believed to have been used as part
of the chiller system to remove calcium carbonate on equipment (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2015).
Both the No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would represent a decrease in potential
uncontrolled storage tank petroleum releases, as compared to when WRAMC was an operational
Army Garrison, and no significant change from the current conditions.

Page 129

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.42 - Petroleum Tanks and Hazardous Substances
Legend
Former Walter Reed Army Medical
Center Campus Boundary
Foreign Missions Center Project Boundary
Historical Building 40 PCBs
PCB Impacted Soil
Mercury Contamination in Sanitary Sewer
Underground Transformer Vaults (PCBs)
Former USTs
Current USTs
Current ASTs
Transformer Pads (PCBs)

N

0’

Page 130

90’

180’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Under the No Action Alternative, one UST and four ASTs would remain at the site of the former
WRAMC. The tanks are used to store diesel fuel to operate electrical generators. These tanks
are double-walled and are continuously monitored for leaks by a leak detection system, except
for the auxiliary AST Unknown 2 which is empty and is disconnected from the primary tank.
The tanks would continue to be maintained in accordance with storage tank and air pollutant
regulations. In the short term future, DOS plans to pump the storage tanks containing diesel
fuel dry to remove the risk of leaks.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in the removal of the storage tanks and decommissioning of the generators. If a building is reused, the foreign mission would be responsible for
removal and decommissioning. If a building is to be demolished, DOS would be responsible for
removal and decommissioning. DOS will be responsible for removal of UST MP-30 that feeds
a generator in Building 54. Through the design guidelines, DOS would ensure that remediation
is carried out in accordance with District and federal law (Appendix C). As of 2017, DOS has
applied for DDOE permits to begin removal of UST MP-30. It is reasonable to anticipate some
generators for electricity would be installed; however, it is likely these would be smaller than
the existing generators and would have smaller fuel tanks associated with them.

3.13.2

Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)

PCBs were historically used in electrical transformers as a dielectric fluid and coolant at the
former WRAMC. There are 18 transformers on the former WRAMC located in eight underground
transformer vaults or on four ground-level transformer pads. No transformer vaults or pads are
known to have been removed from the former WRAMC; none of the contaminated vaults have
been decontaminated. Identified PCB contamination related to transformers is provided below.
There are no known active transformers using PCB dielectric fluid and coolant at the former
WRAMC (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2015). Historically, there were spills of PCB dielectric fluid
and coolant that resulted in contaminated areas both inside the buildings and in outside areas
(U.S. Army Garrison..., 2006a, 2010, 2013, 2015). Several contaminated areas (PCB-impacted
soils, transformer vaults, an interior basement floor, and transformer pads) remain on the property
(Exhibit 3.42). The specific known areas of PCB contamination are described in detail below.
These areas were designated by the Army as “low occupancy areas” (U.S. Army Garrison…,
2006a, 2010, 2013, 2015). A “low occupancy area” is defined as any area where PCB remediation
waste has been disposed of on-site and where occupancy for any individual not wearing dermal
and respiratory protection for a calendar year is less than 840 hours (an average of 16.8 hours
per week) for non-porous surfaces, and less than 335 hours (an average of 6.7 hours per week)
for bulk PCB remediation waste (40 CFR 761.3).
The DOA determined that a soil PCB cleanup level of 25 parts per million (ppm) was appropriate,
and remediated PCB-impacted soils to meet that cleanup level. Based on the available data,
the PCB concentrations in some soils appear to be too high for unrestricted use; therefore, use
restrictions need to be kept in place until either additional investigations and/or remediation
are conducted such that it can be demonstrated the soil PCB concentrations in these areas are
appropriate for the planned reuse. The cleanup level for PCB remediation in high occupancy

Page 131

Final Environmental Impact Statement

areas is less than or equal to one ppm. The transformer pads on the property are currently either
surrounded by chain link fencing (three pads) or are in a restricted area at Building 32 (one pad).
The transformer vaults are covered by metal grates.
Groundwater was not encountered during excavations of PCB-contaminated soil.
◊

Two transformer vaults (East and West) located north of Building 40 were designated by
the DOA as WRAMC Site 6(5)HS/HR. All of the information concerning these vaults
was provided by the DOA (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2006a, 2010, 2013, 2015).
PCB-contaminated water from the Building 40 East Vault was pumped out onto the ground near
the northwest corner of Building 40, inadvertently contaminating the contacted soil. Following
a rain event in 2003, an oily sheen was noticed on water in the vault. An investigation was
conducted by WRAMC in 2004 and it was discovered that pumping of PCB-impacted water
onto the soil adjacent to the vault had resulted in the PCB contamination of an area estimated
to be 55 feet by 55 feet by 2 feet deep. A 4-foot-by-6-foot area contained PCBs at up to 200
ppm; the maximum PCB concentration in the remainder of the area was 44 ppm. The primary
contaminants were Aroclor 1242, Aroclor 1254, and Aroclor 1260. Samples of water from the
Building 40 East Vault contained up to 125 micrograms per Liter (µg/L) PCBs.
WRAMC submitted a work plan to the EPA Regional Administrator and the DC Department
of Health proposing a self-implemented plan to remove impacted soil via excavation.
Removal of soils containing PCBs at a concentration of 25 ppm or more was initiated in
late 2006. The cleanup was conducted in accordance with the self-implementing on-site
PCB cleanup regulations (40 CFR 761.61(a)). An area of soil approximately 65 feet
by 65 feet surrounding the vault was excavated to a depth of approximately 2 feet and
disposed of off-site. The maximum PCB concentration measured in the soil confirmation
samples collected from the floor of the excavation was 7 ppm. However, if this area is
to be redeveloped, the “low occupancy area” cleanup standards may not be applicable
and additional cleanup would be required.
In September 2009, water samples were collected from the Building 40 East and West
Vaults; the East Vault sample contained PCBs at 220 µg/L, but were not detected (<1
µg/L) in the West Vault. In October 2011, accumulated water in both vaults was tested
and PCBs were detected in both vaults; the specific concentrations were not reported in
the 2013 Environmental Condition of Property (ECP) Update. Monitoring wells were
installed around the vaults in June 2010 and sampled for three quarters (U.S. Army PHC,
2011). During the installation of monitoring wells, soil samples were collected in the
borings for the five wells at 2-foot intervals from approximately 13 feet below ground
surface (ft bgs) to 21 ft bgs; none of the samples detected PCBs. All detections of PCBs
in groundwater were less than 0.5 µg/L. The depth to groundwater was approximately
16.8 to 20.1 ft bgs. Free product was not observed in the monitoring wells. The wells
were abandoned in April 2012, as described in a well closure report, reportedly with
the concurrence of DDOE and EPA; however, documentation of the concurrence is not
available.

Page 132

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

Transformers are mounted on two concrete pads in the courtyard east of Building 40. The
pad in the northwest corner of the courtyard (North Pad) contains four transformers, and
the pad in the southwest corner (South Pad) contains three transformers and an electrical
vault with an earthen floor; there is no transformer in the vault. As part of the base
closure and property transfer, an investigation for PCB contamination of the pads, vault,
and nearby soils was conducted and a cleanup action was completed. The information
concerning the PCB contamination in the area of these two pads was provided by the DOA
(U.S. Army Garrison…, 2006a, 2010, 2013, 2015; Total Environmental Concepts, 2014).
The initial sampling was conducted in October 2012. Three wipe samples collected
from the concrete pads and vault wall contained PCBs ranging from 10,000 to 15,000
µg/ 100 square centimeters (cm2). Five soil samples collected from soils adjacent to the
pad contained PCBs ranging from 24 to 150 mg/kg; a sixth soil sample collected from
the floor of the vault at the South Pad contained PCBs at 840 miligrams per kilometer
(mg/kg). Only Aroclor 1260 was detected. The area had been designated by the DOA as
a “low occupancy area”; therefore, the DOA applied cleanup standards in accordance
with 40 CFR 761.125(c)(2): 100 µg/ 100 cm2 for wipe samples and 25 mg/kg for soils.
All of the wipe samples and five of the six soil samples exceeded these standards; only
Aroclor 1260 was detected.
To address these exceedances, a sampling program for delineation of impacted soils was
conducted, soils exceeding the standard were excavated and disposed off-site, and the
pads were cleaned. Soils were excavated to a depth of 2 to 4 feet at a distance of from 2
to 5 feet from the pads, based on delineation sampling events; gravel and soil were also
excavated from the vault. The final post-excavation soil samples ranged from non-detect
(around 0.13 mg/kg) to 6.4 mg/kg; the vault floor was non-detect (<0.13 mg/kg). However,
if this area is to be redeveloped, the “low occupancy area” cleanup standards may not
be applicable and additional cleanup would be required. The wipe samples ranged from
non-detect to 32 µg/ 100 cm2.
Documentation of communications between the DOA and regulatory agencies concerning
this work was not available.

◊

Sampling was conducted in three additional transformer vaults located on the property
that are not discussed in the sections above. All information concerning the vaults was
provided by the DOA (U.S. Army Garrison… 2006a; EA Engineering, Science, and
Technology, 2006).
»» Transformer vault west of Building 57 (Chapel): Five wipe samples were collected
from floor surfaces on this in-ground transformer vault. Analytical results collected
from this area ranged from 30.5 μg/100 cm2 to 87.9 μg/100 cm2.
»» Transformer vault at northwest corner of Building 41 (Red Cross): Two water samples
were collected from this in-ground transformer vault. Analytical results collected
from this area ranged from less than 1.0 μg/L to 1.3 μg/L.

Page 133

Final Environmental Impact Statement

»» Transformer vault west of Building T-2: Four wipe samples were collected from floor
surfaces on this in-ground transformer vault. Analytical results collected from this
area were all below laboratory detection limits.
◊

The machine shop (Room B003) in the basement of Building 40 was found to have
a limited area on the concrete floor that was contaminated with PCB oil (U.S. Army
Garrison… 2006a, 2010, 2013, 2015). The area was remediated in about 2002 with the
exception of a corner containing PCB contamination in concentrations below 25 ppm.
According to the DOA (U.S. Army Garrison Walter Reed Directorate of Public Works,
2004), the EPA stated that the DOA could take no further action to remediate the room
if the room was designated as a “low occupancy area” as defined by 40 CFR 761 and
managed with institutional controls. Documentation of EPA's concurrence is not available.
Based on the available data, “low occupancy area” use restrictions need to be kept in
place until either additional investigations and/or remediation are conducted such that it
can be demonstrated that the soil PCB concentrations in these areas are appropriate for
the planned reuse.

Under the No Action Alternative, the PCB-impacted areas would remain in place.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in the removal of PCB-impacted soil and other
materials in accordance with the regulations. DOS may remediate beyond requirements to the
unrestricted use concentration, depending on the planned use of the area. If a building will be
reused, the foreign mission would be responsible for removal. In order to provide foreign missions
with pad-ready sites, DOS would demolish non-usable buildings in accordance with federal
regulations governing hazardous waste remediation. DOS would include language in property
transfer documents describing the supervision and monitoring of clean-up activities. Through the
design guidelines, DOS would ensure that all remediation is carried out in accordance with District
and federal law (Appendix C).

3.13.3

Hazardous Wastes

Historically, hazardous wastes associated with WRAMC activities included radiological materials,
solvents, paints, strong acids and bases, preservatives, heavy metals, and other materials associated
with laboratory operations and building maintenance; photographic processing waste was also
generated at various laboratories (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2006a). These wastes were generated
at various locations throughout the WRAMC campus and were collected and stored at various
locations at WRAMC over the years, including on the property in the Building 20/40 Hazardous
Waste Storage Bunker (refer to the section below discussing this bunker). According to the
DOA (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2015), the majority of the collection, consolidation, removal, and
disposal of unneeded hazardous substances had been completed in September 2012. Hazardous
substances were reportedly still being used on the property for maintenance of mechanical
equipment and cooling towers. Unusable chemicals had been removed from utility spaces and
consolidated in Building 92 (off the property) for disposal (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2015).

Page 134

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

There were multiple instances of regulatory noncompliance issues reported in the Environmental
Data Review records search; some of these issues did not pertain to the WRAMC - Main Campus.
The 2005 ECP, 2010 ECP Update, 2013 ECP Update, and 2015 ECP Update provided information
for instances of regulatory noncompliance and enforcement actions. The reasonably ascertainable
information from these sources of information did not identify recognized environmental
conditions, de minimis conditions, or environmental concerns that had not been identified
through other sources of information.
The hazardous waste storage bunker was located between Building 20 and Building 40 and was
used to temporarily store hazardous wastes (toluene, xylene, acetone, methanol, hydrochloric
acid, chromic acid) from about 1986 (potentially earlier) to 1991; closure activities for the
storage bunker were reportedly conducted. The following is a synopsis of the bunker closure
activities as described by U.S. Army Garrison… (2006a, 2006b): Federal Facility Compliance
Agreement No. III-FF-RCRA-001, March 29, 1990 instructed WRAMC to submit closure plans
and a schedule for closure. The bunker was designated as WRAMC Installation Restoration
Program Site WRAMC-01, and WRAMC Site Identification Number 5(4)HS/HR. Sampling
was performed at the site on November 4 to 5, 1991, which found high concentrations of
cadmium. The site was cleaned and resampled on June 10, 1992. Cadmium was not detected.
Recommendations to formally close the site were provided in a letter to WRAMC from U.S. Army
Environmental Hygiene Agency (now U.S. Army Center for Health Promotion and Preventive
Medicine) dated July 20, 1992. No documentation could be found to determine whether this
site has been formally closed.

3.13.4

Radiological Decommissioning

Radioactive material was used in Buildings 40, 41, T-2, and the radiological bunker between
Buildings 20 and 40 (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2010a, 2015; Cabrera Services, 2007; New World
Technology, 2003; Tidewater-ChesNuc, 2012; WRAMC Health Physics Office and Cabrera
Services, 2004). The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (USNRC) has released all of these
buildings for “unrestricted use”: Building 40 (USNRC, 2004); Building 41; Building T-2 (U.S.
NRC, 2005); and the radiological bunker (USNRC, 2012).

3.13.5

Asbestos

The District of Columbia Municipal Regulations have requirements for the control of asbestos
(Rule 20-800 Control of Asbestos).
The Occupational Safety and Health Agency has established regulations for asbestos exposure that
address demolition of buildings containing asbestos, removal of asbestos, and its transportation
and disposal (29 CFR 1926.1101 Asbestos).
Based on information provided by the DOA (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2006a, 2015); asbestos is
present in the following buildings:

Page 135

Final Environmental Impact Statement

◊

Buildings in which Asbestos-Containing Material (ACM) was identified in samples
analyzed by a laboratory: 21 and 40.

◊

Buildings for which 1) An ACM survey presumed ACM was to be present based on the
presence of items typically containing ACM (for example, fire doors, tile grout), or 2)
If a building was not accessible and the building was constructed before EPA issued the
final rule on July 12, 1989 that banned most ACM: Buildings 19, 22, 25, 26, 29, 30, 35,
41, 55, 57, and T-2.

The DOA assumed ACM was not present in the following buildings because they were constructed
or entirely renovated after EPA issued the final rule on July 12, 1989 that banned most ACM:
20, 32, and 56.
A network of steam tunnels used to heat the buildings exists beneath the site of the former
WRAMC. The steam tunnels were insulated using ACM. The main tunnels have been abated
by encapsulation, but the smaller laterals have not been abated (U.S. Army Garrison..., 2006a).
Under the No Action Alternative, ACM would remain in buildings and the steam tunnels.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in the removal and disposal of ACM from buildings
and steam tunnels. If a building will be reused, the foreign mission would be responsible for
removal and disposal. If a building is to be demolished, DOS would be responsible for removal
and disposal. Through the design guidelines, DOS would ensure that all remediation is carried
out in accordance with District and federal law (Appendix C).

3.13.6

Lead-Based Paint

WRAMC maintained compliance with applicable LBP regulations, and that the DOA assumes
that all buildings constructed before 1978 contain LBP (U.S. Army Garrison…, 2006a, 2015). The
only buildings on the property that were constructed after 1978 are Buildings 20, 32, 55, and 56.
Buildings 40, 41, 57, and T-2 are presumed to contain LBP because they were constructed prior
to 1978.
The 2015 Update presented the results of LBP surveys conducted in Officers’ Quarters Buildings
19, 21, 22, 26, 30, and 35 in 1994; these residences were built around 1915. From 34 to 44
components (for example, doors, window frames/sills, walls, cabinet, painted piping, baseboards)
in each building were tested; positive results for lead ranged from 7 to 24 components in each
building. Positive tests were defined as 0.5% lead by weight or greater, or 0.7 mg/cm2 if the tests
were conducted using X-ray fluorescence.
According to the DOA, documentation of renovations or abatement activities in buildings on the
WRAMC campus were not always maintained on file or annotated on drawings and, as a result,
the number of buildings and building components containing LBP may be less than identified

Page 136

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

(U.S. Army Garrison…, 2015; U.S. Army Garrison Walter Reed Directorate of Public Works,
2004).
Under the No Action Alternative, LBP would remain in some of the buildings on the site of the
former WRAMC, at least for the short term.
The Selected Action Alternative would require building demolition to occur in accordance with
LBP regulations. Buildings to be reused may require testing and remediation in accordance
with the regulations, depending on the future use of the building. If a building will be reused,
the foreign mission would be responsible for testing and remediation. If a building is to be
demolished, DOS would be responsible for safe disposal. Through the design guidelines, DOS
would ensure that all remediation is carried out in accordance with District and federal law
(Appendix C). DOS would develop a reuse plan for Building 57; DOS would be responsible
for testing and remediating LBP, if necessary.

3.13.7

Disposal Areas

Due to the intensity and nature of previous land uses at the WRAMC, the possibility exists that
a currently unknown disposal area could be discovered during construction. A disposal area is a
place where solid or hazardous waste has been discharged, deposited, injected, dumped, spilled, or
leaked into the land or water (EPA, 2014). Under the No Action Alternative, the disposal area would
remain undetected. Under the Selected Action Alternative, DOS would include contingencies in the
design plans to prepare for the possibility of discovering a disposal area. Disposal areas would be
managed in accordance with District and federal laws and regulations. DOS would follow protocols
in District and federal regulations related to informing the public of hazardous materials discovery.

3.14 ENERGY
In 2006, the District of Columbia government passed the Green Building Act requiring publicly
funded new building construction meet various LEED requirements. In 2010, DOS developed
an agency sustainability plan that requires new construction and renovations achieve a minimum
LEED Silver certification along with other agency-wide sustainability measures. In February
2016, the CEQ issued Guiding Principles for Sustainable Buildings. The six guiding principles
apply to existing federal buildings, new construction and modernization and focus on designing
to optimize energy performance, conserve water, enhance indoor environmental quality, reduce
environmental impacts, and assess and consider climate change risks. EO 13693 Planning for
Federal Stability in the Next Decade was passed in 2015 (replacing EO 13514 Federal Leadership
in Environmental, Energy and Economic Performance). EO 13693 includes the requirement that
new federal facilities greater than 5,000 gross square feet will be constructed to be zero-net-energy
buildings by 2020. A net-zero-energy building is a general term applied to a building using zero
carbon emissions annually. The zero energy consumption principle is gaining considerable
interest as renewable energy harvesting is a means of significantly reducing GHGs. EO 13693
also requires that newly constructed federal facilities will be water or waste net-zero by 2030
where feasible (White House, 2016). With the exception of the reuse of Building 57/Memorial

Page 137

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Chapel, the proposed building reuse and/or new buildings would be designed, constructed, and
occupied by a foreign mission. Foreign missions are not subject to these regulations, EOs, or
guidelines; however, the design guidelines for the development of the FMC encourage foreign
missions to design to these sustainable design principles (Appendix C).
The design guidelines for the FMC encourage sustainable principles to promote sustainability
across five major categories (Appendix C):
◊

Sustainable Sites – encourages strategies that minimize the impact on ecosystems
and water resources (e.g., public transportation access, low-emitting and fuel efficient
vehicles).

◊

Water Efficiency – promotes smarter use of water, inside and out, to reduce potable
water consumption (e.g., water use reduction, water efficient landscaping).

◊

Energy and Atmosphere – promotes better building energy performance through
innovative strategies (e.g., on-site renewable energy, green power).

◊

Materials and Resources – encourages using sustainable building materials and reducing
waste (e.g., storage and collection of recyclables, materials reuse).

◊

Indoor Environmental Quality – promotes better indoor air quality and access to
daylight and views (e.g., increased ventilation, low-emitting materials).

The No Action Alternative would not impact energy use or conservation.
Under the Selected Action Alternative, design guidelines for the FMC recommend that each
chancery building be designed and constructed to be substantially compliant with local building
codes and green building standards that promote sustainability (Appendix C). Work completed
to improve energy efficiency in historic buildings or achieve other sustainability goals would
follow the Secretary of the Interior’s Illustrated Guidelines on Sustainability for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings (2011).
The design guidelines recommend energy reduction by targeting at least 30 percent energy
performance improvements over current ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1 (Appendix C).
Energy performance improvements could be achieved through measures such as high performance
exterior envelopes, selection of heating and cooling systems, improved access to daylight,
improved individual control of thermal comfort and lighting, and use of renewable energy
sources. DOS will continue to coordinate with DC-LRA, which plans to develop a cogeneration
or trigeneration plant that could be connected to the FMC electrical power infrastructure for
improved energy efficiency. These measures would reduce the amount of emissions produced
by the Selected Action Alternative.

Page 138

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

3.15 CONSTRUCTION IMPACTS
Earthwork, including clearing and grubbing, excavating, grading, embankment formation, and
stockpiling, would be required during the construction of the Selected Action Alternative. Exposed
soils may result in the potential for increased site erosion and sedimentation impacts to nearby
water resources. Some of the BMPs that may be implemented are:
◊

Conducting earthwork activities during a known dry season;

◊

Diverting stormwater that originates off-site away from the construction area;

◊

Minimizing the extent and duration of exposed soils by using temporary or permanent
seeding or mulching;

◊

Constructing temporary sedimentation basins;

◊

Establishing a designated equipment cleaning/washing area with measures for the
treatment of runoff prior to discharge; and

◊

Establishing an emergency response spill contingency plan.

Each individual parcel would be required to address construction BMPs and follow procedures
established in the design guidelines (Appendix C). In addition, when a building demolition
occurs on the FMC, the DOS would hire a pest control contractor. DOS would coordinate with
the developers for the land owned by Children’s National Medical Center and the Parks at Walter
Reed; if they demolish buildings or start major construction that would impact pests, DOS would
hire a pest control contractor to deal with pests on the FMC property.
Localized short-term potential impacts that may occur during construction of the Selected Action
Alternative are impacts to air, noise, vibration, traffic, and aesthetics.
Air quality impacts from construction activities would be temporary and are primarily associated
with the operation of diesel-powered equipment and the generation of fugitive dust from
excavation and earthmoving activities. Air emissions from construction equipment can be
minimized by properly maintaining engines. Construction contractors would also be required
to comply with the District's engine anti-idling law, Rule 20-900, Onroad Engine Idling and
Non-Road Diesel Engine Idling. Fugitive dust could be generated as trucks travel to and from
the construction site, and from the handling of cement, aggregate, and other materials. The effect
of fugitive dust would vary depending on weather conditions during periods of earthmoving
activities.
Noise impacts from construction activities are a function of the noise generated by construction
equipment, the location of construction, the sensitivity of adjacent land uses, and the timing and
duration of the noise-generating activity. The dominant source of noise from most construction

Page 139

Final Environmental Impact Statement

equipment is the diesel engine. The construction schedule at the site would adhere to the District's
noise regulations setting legal construction hours from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
Construction can result in varying degrees of ground vibration, depending on the equipment and
methods employed. Operation of construction equipment causes vibrations that spread through
the ground and diminish in strength with distance. Buildings in the immediate vicinity of the
construction site respond to these vibrations with varying results ranging from no perceptible
effects at the lowest levels, low rumbling sounds and perceptible vibrations at moderate levels,
and slight damage to foundations at the highest levels.
Maintenance of traffic and construction staging would be planned and scheduled to minimize
traffic delays. Signage could be used to notify motorists of road closures and detours. Access
to local residences and businesses in the vicinity of the construction site could be maintained.
Temporary disruptions in access would be coordinated with residents and business owners.
Residents along designated truck haul routes may have to contend with the day-to-day
hauling activities associated with the construction site. Construction management plans would
be developed for the construction of each chancery. The plans would include which gates
construction traffic may use and time periods that trucks may come in and out of the site. It is
expected that construction traffic to and from the site is likely to use the Dahlia Street and/or
Main Drive gates. In the vicinity of the site, DDOT designates 16th Street and Georgia Avenue
as truck through routes. South of the site, Aspen Street is designated by DDOT as restricted to
trucks and north of the site, 12th Street is designated by DDOT as restricted to trucks.
Temporary visual impacts attributed to construction activities would be greatest for those residents
immediately adjacent to the construction site. Views of heavy equipment and material stockpiles
would be commonplace for the duration of the construction activities. Fugitive dust may impede
visual quality during limited periods.
Particular attention should be given to the maintenance of public safety during the duration of
construction, given the normal hazards associated with construction. Public access to construction
sites should be prohibited to the extent possible. This can be accomplished with temporary
fencing, warning signs, or other safety precautions.

3.16 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE SHORT-TERM
USE OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND THE MAINTENANCE
AND ENHANCEMENT OF LONG-TERM PRODUCTIVITY
The No Action Alternative would not have short-term uses of the environment that would result
in impacts.
The Selected Action Alternative would result in short-term uses of the environment. Short-term
uses of the human environment would occur during construction. Construction of the Selected
Action Alternative would require a staging area, stockpiling area, roadway construction, and
temporary traffic increase around the construction areas. Additional short-term impacts would

Page 140

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

be air quality degradation from increased emissions from construction vehicles and activities,
noise impacts, other socioeconomic and community impacts from construction vehicles (possible
roadway obstructions or minor traffic detours), and wastes from construction.
The proposed action is undertaken with consideration of the current and future requirements of
the FMC. The projected benefits from property to be developed and/or redeveloped for use as
foreign missions within the District of Columbia provided by the Selected Action Alternative
outweigh the local short-term impacts and use of resources. The proposed action is consistent
with the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity for the study area and region.

3.17 IRREVERSIBLE AND IRRETRIEVABLE
COMMITMENTS OF RESOURCES
Implementation of the Selected Action Alternative involves a commitment of a range of natural,
physical, human, and fiscal resources. Land used in the construction of the Selected Action
Alternative is considered an irreversible commitment during the time period that the land is
used. However, if a greater need arises for use of the land, the land can be converted to another
use. There is no reason to believe such a conversion would be necessary or desirable.
Fossil fuels, labor, and construction materials such as cement, aggregate, and bituminous material
would be expended during construction. Additionally, labor and natural resources would be
used in the fabrication and preparation of construction materials. These materials are generally
not retrievable. However, they are not in short supply and their use would not have an adverse
effect upon continued availability of these resources.
The commitment of these resources is based on the concept that the U.S. Government and
foreign governments would benefit by the Selected Action Alternative’s provision of additional
property to be developed and/or redeveloped for use as foreign missions within the District of
Columbia. Supplying parcels for development would help to satisfy the high demand for foreign
mission facilities in the District and provide the U.S. Government/DOS with land to leverage for
reciprocal sites to build new, safer facilities overseas. The benefits are anticipated to outweigh
the opportunity cost of commitment of these resources.

3.18 INDIRECT AND CUMULATIVE IMPACTS
3.18.1

Indirect Impacts

Indirect (or secondary) impacts are defined as those that are
“…caused by the action and are later in time or farther removed in
distance but are still reasonably foreseeable. Indirect impacts include
growth-inducing impacts and other impacts related to induced changes
in the pattern of land use, population density or growth rate, and
related impacts on air and water and other natural systems, including
ecosystems” (40 CFR 1508.8b).

Page 141

Final Environmental Impact Statement

The Selected Action Alternative creates an indirect-effect zone in which indirect impacts extend
beyond the former WRAMC and the immediate surrounding areas (Exhibit 3.43).
An increase in the potential for sediment loading and roadway contaminants introduced to
surface waters exists for the Selected Action Alternative. Erosion from slopes could affect water
quality in surface waters during construction. Impacts from sedimentation caused by construction
would be temporary. Chemicals and pollutants from increased traffic create indirect impacts
particularly to surface waters and aquatic systems. As part of winter maintenance, anti-icing
chemicals with chlorides (i.e., primarily rock salt) are used to combat the effects of snow, sleet,
and ice. Salt from a road is introduced into surface waters when runoff occurs and flows are
carried into rivers and streams.
The stormwater management practices that would be implemented with the Selected Action
Alternative would have a long-term indirect beneficial impact on surface water by reducing
stormwater runoff, improving water quality, and helping to comply with the TMDLs established
for metals and bacteria (Section 3.2.1).

Exhibit 3.43 - Approximate Distances of Indirect Effect Zones

3.18.2

Cumulative Impacts

Consideration of cumulative effects consists of an assessment of the total effect on a resource or
ecosystem from past, present, and future actions that have altered the quantity, quality, or context
of those resources within a broad geographic scope. Under the CEQ regulations, cumulative
effects are defined as:

Page 142

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

“…the impact on the environment which results from the incremental
impact of the actions regardless of what agency (federal or non-federal)
or person undertakes such other actions. Cumulative effects can result
from individually minor but collectively significant actions taking place
over a period of time” (40 CFR 1508.7).
The cumulative-effects analysis considers the aggregate effects of direct and indirect impacts—
from federal, non-federal, public, or private actions—on the quality or quantity of a resource.
The intent of the cumulative effects analysis is to determine the magnitude and significance of
cumulative effects, both beneficial and adverse, and to determine the contribution of the proposed
action to those aggregate effects. Contributions to cumulative effects from the Selected Action
Alternative on resources would be limited to those derived from direct and indirect impacts of the
proposed action. The cumulative effects analysis for the proposed action was limited to cultural
resources, traffic, climate change, and surface waters from stormwater, as these are the resources
which would be affected by direct and indirect effects of the Selected Action Alternative. No
other resources were considered in the analysis of cumulative effects.
The study area used for the analysis of potential cumulative impacts is approximately 1,795
acres and consists of six census tracts near the former WRAMC that encompass the Brightwood,
Colonial Village, Shepherd Park, and Takoma neighborhoods (Exhibit 3.44).

3.18.2.1 Development

The year 1977 was used as the timeframe for the consideration of past actions. Building 2/
Heaton Pavillion and associated below-grade parking were constructed and ready for occupancy
on September 26, 1977. There were 5,500 rooms covering 28 acres of floor space. It offered
accommodations for 250 patients, admitting more than 14,000 a year. Over 60 clinics served
approximately 750,000 patient visits per year.
There has been some development in the study area since 1977. Past development consists of:
◊

The Rumbaugh Garage which was built in 1993 to provide staff parking for the former
WRAMC. The garage contained 1,135 parking spaces on five levels.

◊

Fisher House #2, built in 1996, a two-story residence that provided accommodations
for Wounded Warriors and their families and was designed to resemble a free-standing
home. The rectilinear layout accommodates 5,017 square feet of floor area divided
between two floors.

◊

The Mologne House, constructed in 1997 to provide hotel-style guest accommodations
for Wounded Warriors, their families, and other guests. The four-story 95,600-square foot
building provides 200 rooms in a combination of efficiencies and dormitories.

Page 143

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.44 - Cumulative Effects Study Area
Legend
Area of Cumulative Eﬀects
Study Area Boundary
Project Area Boundary
Former WRAMC Boundary
Future Development Projects
DC-LRA Development
7200 Georgia Avenue
CNMC
Beacon Center

N

0’

Page 144

1,250’

2,500’

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

◊

The Wagner Sports Center, a two-story 35,700-square foot physical fitness and recreational
facility that was built in 2003.

◊

Fisher House #3, built in 2004, a two-story residence that provided accommodations for
Wounded Warriors and their families and was designed to resemble a large free-standing
home. The rectilinear layout contains 8,692 square feet of floor area divided between
two floors.

Present development consists of public and governmental actions and known private-sector
development projects.
The eastern half of the former WRAMC is planned for redevelopment and reuse of existing
buildings. This redevelopment would provide a mix of uses pursuant to the goals developed in
conjunction with the community and the District of Columbia. The site of the former WRAMC
would have a mix of quality open spaces and retail, residential uses with diverse housing options,
commercial office and/or institutional space, medical care, and cultural and community uses. The
proposed DC-LRA development consists of 1,945,000 square feet of residential development;
767,000 square feet of office development; 212,000 square feet of retail development; and
176,400 square feet of other development (DC Office of Planning, 2013). The site is planned
to be developed over a 15- to 20-year timeframe (Exhibit 3.45). Phase 1 (2014-2017) will be
focused on residential use; Phase 2 (2018-2022) will be focused on mixed-use development and
a corporate or anchor tenant for Building 1; Phase 3 (2023-2027) will be focused on commercial
development in the northeast portion of the site; and Phase 4 (2028-2032) will be focused
on development in the site center, residential infill, and further activation of open space. The
proposed timeframe will be influenced by the success of the District's marketing efforts, regional
economic conditions, capital market conditions, other proximate development, and the potential
for unexpected environmental remediation (District of Columbia Offica of Planning, 2013).
The CNMC, which is currently drafting a master facilities plan for a medical research facility,
plans to reuse existing Building 54 (Research Lab), Building 53 (Lecture Hall), Building 52
(Clinic), and Building 3 (Parking Garage) for their original purposes.
Other development includes 7200 Georgia Avenue NW, a block of planned residential two-by-two
units adjacent to the WRAMC.
The development of the Beacon Center on Georgia Avenue, which is a mixed-use project along
Georgia Avenue, wraps around the existing Emory United Methodist Church. Plans call for
58,000 square feet of new church space, two residential buildings totaling 99 units of affordable
housing, and retail space along Georgia Avenue.
There is no other present development within the study area.
The build-out year for the Selected Action Alternative is 2032; therefore, the year 2032 was the
limit of the future timeframe for reasonably foreseeable future actions.

Page 145

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 3.45 - DC-LRA Proposed Land Use and Phasing

Legend

Legend
PROPOSED LAND USE PLAN

PROPOS

Residential
12TH ST. N.W.

Educational
Mixed-use Creative
Public Facility

O

Open Space (~9 acres)

L
P

HLIA ST. N.W.

6

S

12

MERO

Historic Building Reuse

PHASING PLAN

Research
Lab

18

Phase 1B (2014 - 2017)
Phase 2 (2018 - 2022)

O

H

K

Lecture
Hall
Clinic

AL

9

I

J

L
P

DAHLIA ST. N.W.

Phase 3 (2023 - 2027)

ASPEN ST.

M

Phase 4 (2028 - 2032)

13TH PL. N.W.

EN ST. N.W.

Parking
Garage

Phase 1A-NOI (2013 - 2014)
8

G

ELDER ST. N.W.

W
.

LRA Boundary

U

V

F

N

1

Q

Other Development

R

7

M

16TH ST. N.W.

Children’s National Medical Center

AI

N

.
. N.W
DR

6

S

14 N

GEORGIA AV

Future Growth Area

12

RON
DR

W
DR

NW

X

W

17

15

.

82

E. CA
M

A

11
Z

14 S

18

90

V

U
ASPEN ST.

13TH PL. N.W.

13TH ST. N.W.

.W
.
.N
AV
E
ZO
N
LU

9

16

ASPEN ST. N.W.
14TH ST. N.W.

8

Other De
N

Source: Perkins+Will.

Page 146

PHASING

ERON

C
W.

ME

Y

T

.N

14

14TH PL. N.W.

E. CA

90

C

E

Planned Streetcar

ND

R.

NW

T

B

D

N.

R

7

GEORGIA AVE
. N.W.

Q

A

Existing Building

AV
E

N

FERN ST. N.W.

Mixed-use Open Space (~5 acres)

KA

I

E. N.W.

F

R ST. N.W.

12TH ST. N.W.

E

G

14TH ST. N.W.

C

13TH ST. N.W.

Institutional / Corporate

B

AS

RN ST. N.W.

Mixed Use

Not to Scale

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Reasonably foreseeable development consists of a DDOT partnership with the WMATA to
develop the “DC’s Transit Future System Plan.” The plan establishes a network of new streetcar
lines operating in eight corridors. The extension of the Georgia Avenue to Buzzard Point Streetcar
Line (Phase 2) further north to Takoma would extend streetcar service further north along
Georgia Avenue and connect to the Takoma Metrorail Station. It is expected to be completed
by 2018 (DDOT, 2010).

3.18.2.2 Cultural Resources

The cumulative effect of past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future impacts to cultural
resources consists of adverse effects to the WRAMC Historic District caused by land use changes.
Development on the WRAMC campus after 1977 was designed to serve the DOA medical
mission. Large-scale construction such as the Rumbaugh Garage reduced the visual connection
between contributing historic buildings.
While the history of the Walter Reed campus is one of change and accommodation to meet new
program requirements, the loss of 13 of the 14 contributing buildings within the boundary of the
FMC under the Selected Action Alternative would further diminish the integrity of the historic
district as an assembly of related structures. The infrastructure framework of the district, the
perimeter fence, and the roadways, would remain but the visual continuity of the campus would
be lost from outside looking in and more importantly from within the campus. Contributing
historic resources on the CNMC and DC-LRA developments are planned for reuse. However,
adaptation of these historic buildings for new purposes may contribute to a cumulative impact
on the integrity of the WRAMC Historic District.

3.18.2.3 Traffic

Between 1977 and the present, study area traffic patterns have been affected by the growth and
later closure of the WRAMC, as well as other development within the study area and larger
region. The traffic analysis conducted for the Selected Action Alternative assumed that other
reasonably foreseeable future development, including the CNMC and DC-LRA, would occur.
Thus, the future condition for the Selected Action Alternative includes traffic generated by
existing volumes, the growth percentage, other development, and the proposed action. Mitigation
strategies described in Section 3.6 were developed inclusive of these other planned land use
changes. Therefore, the Selected Action Alternative is not expected to contribute to a cumulative
impact on study area traffic.

3.18.2.4 Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions

Natural processes and human activities affect GHGs. Prominent GHGs include CO2, methane,
O3, water vapor, nitrous oxide, and chlorofluorocarbons. The accumulation of GHG in the
atmosphere affects the Earth’s temperature. Emissions from human activities have caused the
atmospheric concentrations of heat-trapping GHG to increase significantly. These gases prevent
heat from escaping to space, somewhat like the glass panels of a greenhouse. This accumulation
has contributed to an increase in the temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere known as climate
change. Climate change is defined by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change as a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that

Page 147

Final Environmental Impact Statement

alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate
variability observed over a comparable time period (UNFCCC, 2011).
The District of Columbia completed an updated GHG emissions inventory in 2013 for the
calendar years 2012-2013. Greenhouse gas emissions in the District of Columbia fell 23.3%
from 10.10 million metric tons of carbon in 2006 to 7.75 million tons in 2013. Emissions fell
despite significant increases in population and employment in the District during this period.
As a result, per capita emissions dropped 30.8% since 2006. Emissions rose slightly (2.3%)
from 2012 to 2013 due in part to colder weather driving greater building energy use for heating.
As of 2013, the District surpassed its interim goal of reducing emissions 20% by 2015 (DDOE
2013). Exhibit 3.46 provides a breakdown of emissions by sector including buildings (residential,
non-residential, and federal); vehicles (indicated as VMT); mass transit (Metro); and waste; and
it provides a breakdown of the specific energy sources of GHG emissions including electricity,
natural gas, fuel oil, vehicle fuel (gasoline and diesel), kerosene, and emissions from solid waste.
Electricity consumption is the largest driver of GHG emissions.
Reducing building energy use is a challenge central to the success of the Climate Action Plan.
To capitalize on the many benefits of energy efficiency and climate protection, the District of
Columbia has committed to reduce its emissions by 30 percent below 2006 levels by 2020, and
80 percent below 2006 levels by 2050 (GDC, 2010).
The 2020 targets have been modeled to be attainable based on what the District of Columbia
has already implemented, or has planned or proposed. Reductions in 2050 have considerably
more uncertainty surrounding them, but rely on the best information available at the time of this
writing pertaining to future changes to building codes, vehicle fuel efficiency standards, and
other innovations over the next 40 years (GDC, 2010).

Exhibit 3.46 - Regional Emissions Inventory 2013
Community Emissions by Sector

%

4.4 million metric tons CO2e

54

Residential sector (single and multi-family homes)

1.3 million metric tons CO2e

16

Federal facilities managed by the GSA

541,000 metric tons CO2e

7

Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT)

1.6 million metric tons CO2e

19

Transit-Metro

110,000 metric tons CO2e

1

Solid Waste

256,000 metric tons CO2e

3

Community Emissions by Source

Page 148

Green Gas Emissions

Non-Residential sector (commercial buildings, hospitals, schools, etc.)

Green Gas Emissions

%

Electricity

4.8 million metric tons CO2e

58

Natural Gas

1.5 million metric tons CO2e

18

Gasoline

1.5 million metric tons CO2e

18

Fuel Oil

116,000 metric tons CO2e

1

Diesel

94,000 metric tons CO2e

1

Municipal Solid Waste

253,000 metric tons CO2e

3

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Climate change is likely to continue as GHG emissions are warming the planet in ways that will
have impacts on natural resources, energy use, ecosystems, economic activity, and potentially on
the quality of life. The aggregated effect of the reasonably foreseeable future actions identified
in this document would not contribute to the cumulative effects of climate change as these
actions are small in scope.
The No Action and Selected Action Alternatives would not impact GHG emissions. The Selected
Action Alternative may result in a slight negative effect on air quality as the proposed action
would allow more traffic in the area (see Section 3.7).

3.18.2.5 Stormwater Management

Stormwater impacts have been and would continue to be influenced by land use and development.
The cumulative effect of the past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future impacts consists
of an increase in impervious surfaces.
The site of the former WRAMC has a significant extent of impervious cover, accounting for
approximately 23.4 acres, or 52 percent of the area.
The DC-LRA project proposed to capture, treat, and reuse stormwater and achieve full water
reuse by 2050 through the use of a bioretention pond, rain gardens, and curbside bioretention
areas. This would reduce stormwater runoff to pre-developed conditions and therefore relieve
the projects of any downstream impacts. However, the Selected Action Alternative would
be required to reduce the developed peak flows from the site of the former WRAMC to predevelopment conditions through detention, reuse, and low-impact development. To accommodate
the infrastructure improvements outside of individual lots (i.e., roads, walks, open space, etc.),
detention/water quality improvement areas would be designated adjacent to the road network.
With the incorporation of rainwater harvesting and water quality improvement measures into
the network, peak discharge quantities can readily be controlled and managed to satisfy local
regulation requirements. Therefore, no constraints created by the level of development for the
site of the former WRAMC are anticipated by the storm drainage system. Each individual parcel
would be required to address stormwater requirements.

Page 149

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 150

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

4.0 COORDINATION AND CONSULTATION
Public participation is an integral component to the
preparation of an EIS. During the process of planning
and developing the proposed action and preparing an EIS,
public participation begins with scoping of issues and key
concerns to be addressed in the analysis and documentation
and concludes with the ROD (see Section 1.6).

Chapter 4 summarizes the coordination
and consultation activities performed for
this study among the federal, state, and
local agencies and the public.

Scoping is a process for determining the range of issues to be addressed in an EIS and for
identifying potentially significant issues associated with the alternatives (40 CFR Part 1501.7).
The objectives of the scoping process are to notify interested people—other federal, state,
and local agencies, tribes, and other groups—about the alternatives being considered; solicit
comments about environmental issues, alternatives, and other items of interest; and consider
those comments in the analysis and preparation of the EIS.

4.1

SCOPING

At the beginning of the study, scoping letters were mailed to 18 agencies with jurisdiction over
features within the study area or an interest in the study and its results, in accordance with the
procedural provisions of NEPA and DOS’s requirements and policies for early coordination.
Letters, accompanied by a map of the study area, description of the purpose and needs, and an
outline of the study, were mailed in June 2012 to notify the appropriate agencies of the study to be
performed, request specific information, and encourage participation in the study by identifying
areas of initial concern (Exhibit 4.1).
DOS held a public scoping meeting on July 19, 2012 in the District of Columbia. The public
scoping meeting was an open house with displays, a presentation, and time for public comments
and questions to be submitted for consideration in the planning of the proposed action and
preparation of the EIS. Approximately 55 people attended including residents, community
leaders, members of the press, elected officials, and District of Columbia government agency
representatives.
The open house consisted of staffed exhibits with information pertaining to the planned FMC
and the NEPA process. Comments were collected at each station and separate comment stations
were available for participants to submit comments electronically on laptops or on comment
cards. During the scoping process, the key issues of concern identified were the preservation
of trees and open space, traffic impacts, security, and historic preservation (see Section 1.7).

Page 151

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 4.1 - Summary of Scoping Letters
Agency or Organization

Information Requested

Information Received

Federal Agencies
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Region 3

General letter requesting
comments

No response received.

Federal Highway Administration District of Columbia Division

General letter requesting
comments

No response received.

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Baltimore District

General letter requesting
comments

No response received.

National Park Service - National
Capital Region

General letter requesting
comments

No response received.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

Federally listed or proposed
threatened or endangered
No proposed or federally listed endangered or threatened
species or known critical
species are known to exist in the study area.
habitats in the study area

District Agencies
District Department of
Transportation

General letter requesting
comments

DDOT would participate in this master plan and EIS and
provide comments. Be sure to complete a comprehensive
transportation review, impacts to ROW would need to be
permitted, and conduct a tree survey.

District of Columbia State Historic General letter requesting
Preservation Office
comments

No official response received. The DC-HPO is a Consulting
Party in accordance with Section 106 of the NHPA and
has participated in some of the coordination meetings (see
Exhibit 4.2).

General letter requesting
comments

See Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic
Development response.

Executive Office of the Mayor

General letter requesting
comments

List of topics that should be addressed in the scoping
process for this EIS: retaining open access for pedestrians
and bicyclists, preserving open access through the ellipse on
Main Drive, permitting a proposed setback of 30 feet from
the curbline along the southern DC-LRA/DOS boundary,
ensuring compatibility with the Walter Reed Reuse Site
Small Area Plan, protecting trees, providing open space,
historic buildings, fencing, and coordination with the
DC-LRA.

District of Columbia Council

General letter requesting
comments

Ward 4 Councilmember Muriel Bowser will participate in
scoping to assist in identifying neighborhood concerns.

District of Columbia Water and
Sewer Authority

General letter requesting
comments

The project location is within an area that is being planned
for pressure zone improvements, the sizes of water mains
would need to be reviewed.

District Department of
Environment

District-listed or proposed
threatened or endangered
species or known critical
habitats in the study area

Be sure to address the environmental concerns of the EPA
and the District Government in the 1990s, including a
nuclear reactor leak, PCB leaks, noncompliant hazardous
waste storage sites and other potential issues. The proposed
project does not harbor any species listed by the ESA, any
species classified by Nature Serve as GI and G2, nor any
ecologically sensitive communities.

District Department of Parks and
Recreation

General letter requesting
comments

No response received.

District Office of Planning

Continued on following page

Page 152

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 4.1 - Summary of Scoping Letters (Continued)
Agency or Organization

Information Requested

Information Received

General letter requesting
comments

Due to its administrative role and that it does not make
land use policy recommendations, it would be a conflict of
interest to be a cooperating agency for this EIS.

General letter requesting
comments

DC-LRA will participate as a coordinating agency. List
of topics that should be addressed in the scoping process
for this EIS: retaining open access for pedestrians and
bicyclists, preserving open access through the ellipse on
Main Drive, permitting a proposed setback of 30 feet from
the curbline along the southern DC-LRA/DOS boundary,
ensuring compatibility with the Walter Reed Reuse Site
Small Area Plan, protecting trees, providing open space,
developing sustainability goals, minimizing demolition of
historic buildings, minimizing fencing, and coordination
with the DC-LRA on possible shared parking and interim
use of the FMC site.

The Committee of 100 on the
Federal City

General letter requesting
comments

The EIS process should respect the site’s history, consider
all natural environmental impacts, including visual,
relate new development to existing neighborhoods,
ensure that issues related to all transportation modes are
fully considered, and design public street connections to
surrounding neighborhoods.

Metro Washington Council of
Governments

General letter requesting
comments

No response received.

National Capital Planning
Commission

General letter requesting
comments

Make sure the EIS addresses the direct, indirect, and
cumulative impacts on social and economic features,
transportation systems, cultural resources, natural features,
utilities, and health and safety.

Washington Metropolitan Area
Transit Authority

General letter requesting
comments

Wishes to be a coordinating agency and would transmit the
requested information as part of scoping.

District Office of Zoning

Office of the Deputy Mayor
for Planning and Economic
Development

Regional or Other

4.2

AGENCY COORDINATION

Agency coordination is a general term referring to the process whereby government agencies
are afforded an opportunity to review and comment on the proposed action at various points in
the study and at key milestones.
This study was discussed with agencies having direct or indirect jurisdiction over features in the
study area or an interest in the study, through a series of meetings (Exhibit 4.2). The agencies
that regularly attended these meetings were DOS, NCPC, DMPED, ACHP, CFA, DC-HPO, and
DC-LRA. CFA submitted a letter to DOS on February 24, 2017 approving the Selected Action
Alternative concept and providing comments for the development of the final master plan.
At their March 2, 2017 meeting, NCPC provided comments to DOS in support of the draft master
plan, including recommendations to be incorporated into the final master plan.

Page 153

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings
Meeting

August 15, 2012

Discussion and Results
The purpose of this meeting was to initiate discussions with Federal and District agencies and
to receive comments and feedback on the planning and development of the proposed action. A
presentation was shown consisting of an overview of the proposed action, existing buildings at the
former WRAMC, the NEPA process, transportation issues, and the landscape and topography of
the former WRAMC. Agency feedback emphasized the need for: 1) providing opportunities for
reuse of historic buildings; 2) maintaining trees on western site border; 3) maintaining a relationship
between DC-LRA and FMC campuses and keeping the existing street grid; 4) maintaining the historic
perimeter fence, designing additional fencing to be compatible with the historic fence, and minimizing
the visual impact of interior fencing; and 5) respecting historic site use and DC-LRA density zones.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC, DMPED, ACHP, CFA
The purpose of this meeting was to develop a proposed conceptual framework for density and massing
on the site, create parameters for site utility development, and brainstorm concepts for potential adaptive
reuse of historic buildings. Historic buildings were discussed, and a reuse potential rating was assigned
based on the following criteria:

October 17-18, 2012

◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊
◊◊

Building condition
Historic significance
Potential for reuse as a chancery
Architectural aesthetic
Lot development efficiency
Appropriateness of building size and type
Compliance with FMA
Available parking
Order of magnitude cost for redevelopment
Marketability to foreign missions
Optimization of site usage

The buildings with the highest reuse potential rating were Buildings 57, 52, and 41. Building 40 also had
a moderately high reuse rating.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC

November 5, 2012

The purpose of this meeting was to review the progress and status of the study and to seek feedback
on the planning and development of the proposed action. Federal and District agencies provided
feedback on the proposed action. CFA recommended developing the axial connection between
Building 40 and Building 1, keeping the historic perimeter fence, and developing potential open
spaces between buildings to create campus character. The CFA expressed that the cost model
should not be the only driver of site design, and that some early concepts for discussion appeared
too suburban in character. The DC-LRA expressed concern about potential additional traffic along
Main Drive and the residential areas to the north and south of the FMC and requested coordination
between DOS and DC-LRA teams for potential east-west site connections. The NCPC expressed
potential concern about the option to restrict cross-site vehicle traffic on Dahlia Street. NCPC
suggested studying a campus quad model, possibly developing a commemoration space between
Buildings 40 and 1, and possibly repurposing Buildings 40 and 54. The DC-HPO commented
that the campus was not historically outward facing and stated the importance of reflecting how
buildings relate to each other and to the main internal streets.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC, DMPED, ACHP, CFA, DC-LRA, DC-HPO

Continued on following page

Page 154

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting

November 14, 2012

Discussion and Results
The purpose of this meeting was to develop and discuss some preliminary concepts for future
discussions: 1) developing on a “clean” site, 2) retaining Buildings 41, 52 and 57, and 3) retaining
historically significant buildings, landscapes, and cultural elements. Four preliminary concepts were
developed:
◊◊ Suburban/ICC model - Chanceries are accessed from internal DOS-owned streets.
◊◊ Urban/Massachusetts Avenue model - Based on the idea that many chancery lots have
addresses on both existing and proposed public street.
◊◊ Retain eligible buildings model - Based on retaining the individually eligible, historic
WRAMC buildings.
◊◊ Hybrid model - Combines characteristics of the above models, and lots should front
primary roads.
Attendees: DOS, DC-LRA

November 27, 2012

The purpose of this meeting was to further develop and discuss some preliminary concepts
including the preferred elements of each. The discussions of preliminary concepts focused on cost
effectiveness, ability to address community concerns raised during scoping, and effects on cultural
resources (i.e., potential for adaptive building reuse, maintaining the historic street grid and the
historic open character of campus). The results of this discussion were used to develop a broad
range of reasonable alternatives.
Attendees: DOS, DC-LRA

January 22, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to develop a roadmap for NHPA Section 106 consultation with
input from DC-HPO and ACHP, as well as initiate discussion on the structure of a PA for the
former WRAMC. ACHP recommended the PA reference existing approval processes (e.g., NCPC
process). Known factors should be documented in clauses and written to allow flexibility for the
future. Unknown factors should be accounted for in PA clauses, such as: 1) the potential for a
separate Section 106 undertaking if a parcel is sold in a fee simple acquisition to a foreign country,
2) underground artifacts that may be discovered during construction, and 3) the potential for a given
historic building to be removed versus repurposed.
Attendees: DOS, ACHP, DC-HPO

April 16, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to further analyze the range of reasonable alternatives. Agencies
provided feedback that action alternatives should: 1) create a strong front door presence for
chanceries along primary streets, 2) orient open green space to the front of chancery lots, and 3)
maintain historic context of Historic Building 57/Memorial Chapel by not overshadowing the
building with chanceries and consider surrounding it with green space. The results of this meeting
were used to refine the range of reasonable Alternatives 1–6 and provide the DOS with criteria for
narrowing the range of alternatives.
Attendees: DOS, CFA, NCPC, DC-HPO

May 6, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to further refine the range of reasonable alternatives. The
development and analysis of alternatives focused on strong street frontage and green spaces. The
Chapel was retained with green spaces, reusing Dahlia and 14th Streets would be appropriate,
and using Dahlia Street as the main spine linking FMC with DC-LRA was good. CFA applauded
keeping the chapel and surrounding it with green space.
Attendees: DOS, CFA

May 23, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to further refine the range of reasonable alternatives with the
NCPC. Discussions and decisions concluded that the proposed plan made sense and is flexible to
accommodate potential differing needs of future foreign missions, and considered keeping both the
Chapel with green spaces and having Dahlia Street as a main street with green space along 14th
were good ideas. NCPC liked and saw the improved access to DC-LRA development as embracing
good urban planning and connectivity with the surrounding neighbors.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC
Continued on following page

Page 155

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting

June 3, 2013

Discussion and Results
The purpose of the meeting was to further refine the range of reasonable alternatives with CFA. CFA
provided feedback that developing both 14th Street and Dahlia Street as major roads was desirable
and leaving the area around the Chapel as green space was good. Comments were that the design
was a real improvement; it was pleasing, natural, logical, worked well, and had a campus feel.
Attendees: DOS, CFA

November 14, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to review the project status with the NPS, Rock Creek
Conservancy, and DC-LRA and receive feedback. NPS requested to be a consulting party for
Section 106, and that future connections between the WRAMC site and Rock Creek Park be
considered. NPS, DC-LRA, and DOS will coordinate to determine potential access locations. Rock
Creek Conservancy requested that DOS and DC-LRA accommodate informational signage and/
or information kiosks about Rock Creek Park on the WRAMC site. DOS and DC-LRA agreed to
consider placing informational signage at one or more locations to be determined in the future.
Attendees: DOS, DC-LRA, NPS, Rock Creek Conservancy

December 3, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to update CFA on the project status and receive feedback on
proposed design guidelines. CFA recommended that foreign mission fences should use established
height/height ranges, dark colors, a specified range of appropriate materials, and achieve desired
variety at gates or entrances. The design guidelines should recognize the heritage of the garden area
between Buildings 1, 40, and 41.
Attendees: DOS, CFA

December 4, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to update NCPC on the project status and receive feedback
on proposed design guidelines. NCPC noted that the design guidelines were moving in a good
direction, and that architectural guidelines for new structures should be varied, based on proximity
to historic structures.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC

December 10, 2013

The purpose of the meeting was to further coordinate traffic issues with DDOT. The current 2010
traffic counts will be updated; however, the results are expected to be very similar to the 2010
counts. ICC design guidelines allow 1:1 parking ratio; DDOT would like to see a lower ratio for
FMC parking. The design team will work with NCPC to develop design guidelines using 1:1 ratio
as the worst-case scenario and the following criteria:
◊◊ There will be no on-street parking allowed at the FMC.
◊◊ Each foreign mission will be responsible for providing parking resources to satisfy both
proposed and future staffing levels as well as visitors. Foreign missions will need to
either house their entire employee parking on-site, or substitute alternative transportation
measures. Parking must be accommodated on each lot(s) and concealed from view in
structured parking. Visitor parking may include four to eight surface parking spaces
depending on lot size. Where only one building is constructed, structured parking shall be
underground. If multiple buildings are planned, aboveground structured parking may be in
an adjacent structure on the lot.
◊◊ During the design approval process, each foreign mission shall submit a transportation/
parking management plan for review and approval by NCPC. Plans may include
alternative transportation options in lieu of providing 100% of parking requirements on
site. Sustainable transportation plans incorporating alternative transportation are highly
encouraged.

Continued on following page

Page 156

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting

February 26, 2014

Discussion and Results
The purpose of the meeting was to review the content of the DEIS with regard to cultural resources,
particularly buildings and archaeology, and provide the consulting/interested parties an opportunity
to provide comments as part of the Section 106 consultation process. ACHP would like DOS to draft
proposed mitigation measures, including a creative marketing plan for potential reuse of historic
buildings. ACHP suggests that DOS conduct a preliminary analysis of cost for mitigation measures.
It was requested that DOS include additional ANC groups and the Rock Creek office of the NPS in
the Section 106 working group; DOS indicated an invitation would be extended for future meetings.
Attendees: DOS, ACHP, DC-HPO, NCPC, Committee of 100 on the Federal City, APCWDW,
ANC 4B, DC Preservation League, National Trust for Historic Preservation

April 2, 2014

The purpose of the Section 106 consultation meeting was to review comments received through
the DEIS public comment period related to cultural resources, and to provide the consulting/
interested parties an opportunity to comment as part of the Section 106 consultation process.
ANC 4B emphasized the importance of design guidelines in managing the final appearance
and protection of historic resources (buildings, roads, vegetation). The Committee of 100 was
concerned that maximizing the number of lots and minimizing maintenance of public features
could let the area look unmaintained. DOS will maintain low-maintenance public spaces that
utilize natural vegetation, incorporate bioretention, and retain and enhance green space. Foreign
missions will maintain the property within their lots, and be subject to landscaping standards in
the design guidelines that will be reviewed by DC-HPO, NCPC, and CFA. It was agreed that a
better understanding of the Enhanced Use Lease for Building 40 is needed prior to transfer of the
property from DOA to DOS. It was noted that a separate adverse effects report is needed, and will
be developed for the next meeting.
Attendees: DOS, ACHP, DC-HPO, NCPC, Committee of 100 on the Federal City, APCWDW,
ANC 4B, DC Preservation League

May 7, 2014

The purpose of the Section 106 consultation meeting was to discuss the Assessment of Adverse
Effects Report and conceptual structure/content of PA. It was noted that the PA should distinguish
between what will occur on the DOS-controlled development versus the foreign mission-controlled
development. Mitigation should include educational material advocating for building reuse. ACHP
will provide a suggested outline of the PA and suggested milestones.
Attendees: DOS, ACHP, DC-HPO, NCPC, Committee of 100 on the Federal City, APCWDW,
ANC 4B02 and ANC 4A03, DC Preservation League, NPS – Rock Creek Park

July 2, 2014

The purpose of the Section 106 consultation meeting was to review the purpose and intent of a PA
as the resolution of the Section 106 consultation process, develop an initial outline for the PA, and
establish a timeline for developing the PA. ACHP suggested four categories of stipulations for the
PA: 1) pre-transfer of the property to DOS, 2) development – leasing and construction, 3) FMC
management period, and 4) administrative. A PA outline was drafted through group discussion at the
meeting, and a milestone calendar was provided by ACHP subsequent to the meeting.
Attendees: DOS, ACHP, DC-HPO, NCPC, Committee of 100 on the Federal City, APCWDW,
NPS – Rock Creek Park, National Trust for Historic Preservation

December 14, 2015

The purpose of the meeting was to provide an update on the new DOS property boundary, the
new parcel designated for Public Health, and the revised master plan concept. CFA and NCPC
recommended aligning the access circle with the former main entry to Building 54, reducing the
number of parcels in the Building 57/Chapel quadrant, emphasizing Dahlia Street frontage, focusing
on preserving trees and steep slopes in the design guidelines, and revisiting the decision to stop 14th
Street at Dahlia Street. DOS reviewed their Federal Register publication, noting that FMA review
process and Foreign Missions Board of Zoning Adjustment will be the primary lot development and
design review authority.
Attendees: DOS, CFA, NCPC

Continued on following page

Page 157

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting

February 3, 2016

Discussion and Results
The purpose of the meeting was to present the revised master plan concept resulting from the
Congressional legislation change to reduce the DOS property acreage. DC-HPO emphasized
the need to preserve the historic street pattern, and expressed concern that shifting 14th Street
eastward would result in a nearly zero-lot-line condition for Building 54, which would not be best
for its setting or for circulation around the building. DC-HPO would like individual site fencing
to be standardized, but DOS is restricted by treaty obligation/reciprocity agreements with foreign
missions. NCPC and DC-HPO noted that the master plan must clearly describe access from the
street, onsite parking, setbacks, and frontage/building orientation for each lot. ACHP identified focus
points for PA development: 1) master plan guideline specificity, 2) review process for individual
projects, and 3) marketing plans for Buildings 40, 41, and 57 reuse. ACHP would like NCPC to be a
signatory to the PA. ACHP noted that mitigation for Buildings 40 and 41 will need to be developed
in upcoming Section 106 consultation meetings.
Attendees: DOS, DC-HPO, ACHP, NCPC

February 19, 2016

The purpose of the meeting was to review updates to the master plan with DDOT in preparation
for submitting a revised Transportation Impact Study. DOS noted that overall trip generation is
expected to be one-half to one-third of the original study with the reduction of acreage. DDOT
expressed concern about the closure of 14th Street at Alaska Avenue. Although neighbors would
prefer to limit traffic going north on 14th Street, the closure could divert more traffic to other
north-south secondary streets such 13th Street. DDOT would prefer that there are guarantees that
the Main Drive circle at 14th Street be open. DOS and DC-LRA have negotiated access easements
at circle that will maintain it being open and provide improvements and maintenance by DC-LRA
development group. It was noted that the Transportation Impact Study counts occurred in 2012.
DDOT recommended doing counts for four sample intersections. If the counts are higher, DOS
would need to do counts for additional intersections. If the counts are lower or the same, the 2012
data would be acceptable. Coordination with CNMC to determine their scope, trip generation, and
mitigation is needed.
Attendees: DOS, DDOT

February 19, 2016

The purpose of the meeting was to review the status of the FMC Master Plan with CNMC and
discuss the CNMC program. CNMC stated that Building 54 (Research Lab), Building 53 (Lecture
Hall), Building 52 (Clinic), and Building 3 (Parking Garage) will be reused for their original
purposes. CNMC has coordinated with the District, neighbors, NCPC, and DC-HPO. CNMC
has commenced design as no rezoning, master plan, or NEPA action is required. CNMC expects
property transfer within 60 days and will seek permanent utility easements from DOS. Staffing will
consist of 450 workers for the next three to five years, and 550-600 workers at full capacity. Work
hours are expected to be 8:30-5:30, with some evening work. Maximum expected daily outpatients
will be 50. Garage and north parking lot will be used, and excess spaces can be rented by DC-LRA
or DOS. CNMC does not plan to open 13th Place to Fern Street and would prefer to access the site
via Dahlia Street from Alaska Avenue. CNMC will discuss possible shared security cost with DOS.
CNMC finds either design for 14th Street acceptable; if a cul-de-sac, they would prefer to center it
at Building 54’s main entrance with a drop-off area on CNMC property.
Attendees: DOS, CNMC

Continued on following page

Page 158

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting

May 23, 2016

Discussion and Results
DOS held an open house and tour of the DOS property for 24 interested foreign missions. Between
March 2016 and February 2017, DOS also met individually with 10 additional foreign missions. At
the open house and meetings, discussion was held on potential modifications to the lot layouts that
could improve the marketability of parcels to potential tenants. Interest was expressed in reusing
several buildings (Building 56/Fisher House #3, Building 20/Mologne House, and Building 32/
Wagner Sports Center) that are not contributing elements to the historic district. Parcelization
options were adjusted to increase flexibility and allow for the preservation or expansion of these
existing buildings.
Attendees: DOS, representatives from foreign missions

July 13, 2016

The purpose of the meeting was to provide a master plan progress update to CFA and NCPC and
receive feedback on concept designs. CFA suggested adjusting lot lines to match topography in
several areas, and that buildings facing the proposed green space south of Building 41 should have
significant façades facing this space. It was recommended that the setback on the east side of Dahlia
Street be reviewed. CFA expressed concern that the DC tree preservation guidelines may need to be
augmented in the design guidelines to enforce maintaining site character.
Attendees: DOS, CFA, NCPC

September 16, 2016

The purpose of the meeting was to review DDOT comments on the CTR. DOS is performing a
sensitivity analysis at DDOT request to determine what happens if the DC-LRA development does
not proceed or proceeds at a slower place. It was suggested that DOS confirm that the negotiations
between the Army and DC-LRA include an access easement for DOS to and from the FMC via
Main Drive. DDOT recommended that DOS provide a bikeshare station. DOS stated that they are
willing to set aside an area at the intersection of Dahlia and 14th Streets for a bikeshare station. It
was agreed that the DDOT review process for each chancery development will be identical to the
process already used throughout DC as established by the FMA. There will be no change to the
current review process.
Attendees: DOS, DDOT

October 14, 2016

CFA noted that the divided 14th Street is a nice feature. CFA requested that more street character be
shown for Dahlia Street for continuity and transition between DC-LRA and FMC (sidewalks, trees,
lights, etc.). CFA would like DOS to recommend fence locations as part of design guidelines. CFA
suggested that the 16th Street setback for lots along street needs to be greater. CFA was concerned
about the “no-man’s land” between perimeter fence and the security fence. DOS indicated that the
foreign mission would be responsible for the maintenance of that area as natural vegetation, and
CFA recommended this be include in the design guidelines (as part of lease).
Attendees: DOS, CFA, NCPC

November 28, 2016

The purpose of the meeting was to update NCPC staff on the status of the master plan. NCPC
requested that DOS present the current draft of the master plan for concept review to NCPC in
spring 2017.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC

Continued on following page

Page 159

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting

February 14, 2017

Discussion and Results
The purpose of the meeting was to review NCPC and DDOT comments on the revised CTR. DDOT
and NCPC would prefer a vehicular connection at 14th Street and Alaska Avenue, to mitigate
capacity concerns at other study area intersections, and provide urban connectivity. DOS expressed
concern that a vehicular connection would create an adverse impact to the historic fence and affect
net-zero cost model by reducing marketable lot sizes, a notable concern due to the loss of land
to CNMC. DDOT expressed concern that full public access be maintained on private streets, and
DOS responded that public access will be maintained, with the exception of national emergencies.
DDOT requested that DOS ensure site access meet DDOT standards, including that site driveways
be located at least 60 feet from adjacent intersections. DOS responded that the DDOT standards are
listed in the design guidelines. DDOT requested that DOS design private streets to DDOT design
and construction standards, with the noted exception of a 75-foot ROW minimum. DOS agreed
to construct a westbound Dahlia Street turn lane at DDOT’s request. DOS agreed to construct the
LRA-committed improvements to Main Drive and 16th Street/Alaska Avenue if the FMC surpasses
50% build out and the LRA is not yet developed, given that LRA would later reimburse DOS. DOS
agreed to consider installing a Capital Bikeshare station as mitigation in lieu of a southbound right
turn lane at 16th Street/Sherrill Drive/Aspen Street. DDOT also requested a Capital Bikeshare
station on the FMC campus and DOS will review the request. DDOT/NCPC requested campus-wide
TDM measures and assurance that TDM measures will be encouraged.
Attendees: DOS, DDOT, NCPC

February 16, 2017

The purpose of the meeting was to present the revised master plan concept to CFA. CFA approved
the revised concept and provided comments for development of the final master plan. CFA
emphasized the importance of connection to the surrounding community.
Attendees: DOS, CFA

February 23, 2017

The purpose of the Section 106 consultation meeting was to update consulting parties on the revised
master plan concept resulting from the reduction in project acreage. Consulting parties’ comments
on the revised concept included the request that bicycle routes be clearly marked, that Memorial
Chapel be open for public events, and that Building 40 be considered for reuse by multiple tenants/
foreign missions. It was requested that DOS consider selling and moving the Officer’s Quarters
buildings, but DOS responded that the value and condition of the houses is unlikely to warrant the
cost of relocation. Moving historic resources as part of a mitigation effort is typically linked to
individually eligible, not contributing resources. Consulting parties were concerned with individual
site fence design, and DOS responded that the design guidelines include individual fence design.
Parking management for each site was discussed. ANC4A and ANC4B requested that the design
review process for individual chanceries include clear opportunities for their involvement. An
updated schedule for PA development was reviewed.
Attendees: DOS, DC-HPO, NCPC, DCPL, Committee of 100 on the Federal City, Walter Reed
Society, ANC4B, ACHP

March 2, 2017

At the March 2016 NCPC meeting, NCPC provided comments to DOS in support of the revised
master plan concept. NCPC noted its support for the DOS vision to create a new FMC and its plans
to create a low-density chancery development in scale with the surrounding neighborhood. NCPC
encouraged DOS to preserve historic buildings where feasible, and recommended a vehicular
connection at 14th Street and Alaska Avenue. NCPC and DOS agreed that the draft master plan
would be updated to reflect the MOA on the design review process signed February 27, 2017.
The meeting included an opportunity for members of the public to comment. The Shepherd Park
Citizen’s Association requested that Memorial Chapel be opened to the public and available for
community events. Other comments included a request to provide vehicular access at 14th Street
and Alaska Avenue, and to promote multiple tenants/foreign missions at Building 40 to encourage
reuse.
Attendees: DOS, Shepherd Park Citizen’s Association, NCPC
Continued on following page

Page 160

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 4.2 - Summary of Agency Meetings (Continued)
Meeting
May 4, 2017

Discussion and Results
The purpose of the meeting was to review the 2nd draft of the PA, and receive and respond to
questions from consulting parties. It was requested that the PA add language describing the review
process for infrastructure design, and provide clarity on opportunities for input by consulting parties.
Attendees: DOS, NCPC, DCPL, Walter Reed Society, National Trust for Historic Preservation

4.3

CONSULTING PARTIES

In compliance with Section 106 of the NHPA, consulting parties were identified to consult on
potential effects to historic resources and measures to minimize and mitigate the effects. Letters
were sent to the following parties notifying them of the undertaking and asking for their interest
in participating as consulting parties:
◊

District of Columbia Office of Planning Historic Preservation Office

◊

The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

◊

The National Capital Planning Commission

◊

The U.S. Commission of Fine Arts

◊

Advisory Neighborhood Commission 4A

◊

Advisory Neighborhood Commission 4B

◊

Brightwood Community Association

◊

The Committee of 100 on the Federal City

◊

District of Columbia Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development

◊

District of Columbia Office of Planning

◊

National Park Service – Rock Creek Park

◊

The District of Columbia Preservation League

◊

The National Trust for Historic Preservation

◊

Shepherd Park Citizens Association

◊

The Walter Reed Society

◊

Ward 4 Council Member Muriel Bowser

Page 161

Final Environmental Impact Statement

◊

Washington City Administrator

The following have requested to be consulting parties:
◊

District of Columbia Office of Planning Historic Preservation Office

◊

The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

◊

The National Capital Planning Commission

◊

The Committee of 100 on the Federal City

◊

The Alliance to Preserve The Civil War Defenses of Washington

◊

National Park Service – Rock Creek Park

4.4

PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT

A public meeting was held at Tifereth Israel Temple on 16th Street on June 18, 2013. The purpose
of the meeting was to introduce the process of complying with Section 106 of the NHPA and
receive feedback and stakeholder concerns related to historic and archaeological resources. The
meeting consisted of a presentation on the historic significance of WRAMC and a question and
answer session. The approximately 60 attendees were comprised of members of the public and
the following government and community groups:
◊ NCPC

◊ Brightwood Community Association

◊ The Committee of 100 on the Federal City ◊ Shepherd Park Community Association
◊ DMPED

◊ DC-HPO

◊ ANC 4A

◊ ANC 4B

◊ DC-LRA

◊ APCWDW

◊ Executive Office of the Mayor

◊ Walter Reed Society

The APCWDW and The Committee of 100 on the Federal City noted that the WRAMC can be
viewed as “sacred ground” because of the Civil War Battle of Fort Stevens. They emphasized the
need to preserve open space on the campus and provide interpretive signage on historic resources.
DOS noted that additional research would occur to understand the level of sensitivity of the FMC
site with regard to historic and prehistoric activity, and information would be incorporated into
the master plan. DOS would support the signage program being created as a stipulation of the
Army PA and incorporate the signage program into the master plan.

Page 162

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The Committee of 100 on the Federal City urged DOS to consider retaining or reusing the
Officers’ Quarters buildings. DOS noted that while the quarters are not marketable for reuse as
chanceries, possible mitigation options are being considered for the buildings to be relocated
(as five of them were in 1954) for reuse by others.
A meeting was held with ANC 4B on November 25, 2013. The meeting consisted of a brief
presentation on the project status and question and answer session. Approximately 50 participants
attended.
A meeting was held with ANC Single Member District 4A01 on December 2, 2013. The
meeting consisted of a brief presentation on the project status and question and answer session.
Approximately 40 participants attended.
A meeting was held with ANC 4A on December 3, 2013. The meeting consisted of a brief
presentation on the project status and question and answer session. Approximately 40 participants
attended.
An open house and a public hearing were held during the 45-day comment period on the
DEIS. The open house was on February 20, 2014 at the Tifereth Israel Congregation, 7701
16th Street NW, Washington, DC. The purpose of the open house was to 1) meet with people
with an interest in the study to answer questions about the study, and 2) receive suggestions for
further avoidance and minimization of potential impacts from the action alternative and ways
to improve the analysis of alternatives prior to decision-making.
The public hearing was held on March 6, 2014 at the Tifereth Israel Congregation, 7701 16th
Street NW, Washington, DC and a transcript of the hearing was prepared. The purpose of the
public hearing was for the public to offer comments on the DEIS prior to preparation of the FEIS
and decision-making; the public hearing was not a question and answer session.
An open house and a public hearing on the SDEIS were held during the 45-day comment period.
The purpose of the open house was to: 1) meet with people with an interest in the study to answer
questions about the study, and 2) receive suggestions for further avoidance and minimization of
potential impacts from the action alternative and ways to improve the analysis of alternatives
prior to decision-making. The Open House and Public Hearing were held on April 20, 2017 at
the Red Cross Building #41, Dahlia Street NW, Washington, DC and a transcript of the hearing
was prepared. Six attendees offered substantive comments during the public hearing. The purpose
of the public hearing was for the public to offer comments on the SDEIS prior to preparation
of the FEIS and decision-making; the public hearing was not a question and answer session.
A meeting was held with ANC 4A on March 7, 2017, where flyers were distributed and a brief
project status was provided along with an invitation to the public and ANC board to attend the
FMC Open House on April 20, 2017. Approximately 50 participants attended.

Page 163

Final Environmental Impact Statement

A meeting was held with ANC 4B on March 27, 2017, where flyers were distributed and a brief
project status was provided along with an invitation to the public and ANC board to attend the
FMC Open House on April 20, 2017. Approximately 50 participants attended.

4.5

PUBLIC INFORMATION

A study-specific website (http://www.state.gov/ofm/property/fmc/index.htm) was developed
and maintained throughout the study. The website consists of a background page, need for the
proposed action, details of the master plan and EIS, contact information, and related links.

4.6

RESPONSES TO SUBSTANTIVE COMMENTS

Under the CEQ’s regulations implementing NEPA (40 CFR Part 1503.1), an agency that publishes
a DEIS is required to:
◊

Obtain the comments of Federal agencies with jurisdiction by law or special expertise, and

◊

Request comments from:
»» Agencies at all levels of government authorized to develop and enforce environmental
standards;
»» Indian tribes, when the effects may be on a reservation;
»» An agency that has requested EISs on actions of the kind proposed; and
»» The public, including actively soliciting comments from those persons or organizations
that may be interested or affected.

Comments received can range from statements of support for, or opposition to, an agency’s
proposed action to detailed critiques of the EIS’s analyses and suggestions for new alternatives.
Comments might identify factual errors, omissions, areas of controversy, and provide new
information to be considered in the analysis of alternatives and prior to decision-making.
An agency’s focus in preparing the FEIS is the consideration of and responses to these comments.
The comment-response process includes all steps from receipt and consideration of comments
through the preparation of responses and any needed revisions to the EIS. An agency cannot
complete the NEPA process until it has considered and responded to substantive comments on
the DEIS and SDEIS. The comment-response process is intended to help make better and more
informed decisions.
The DOS announced the availability of the FMC at the Former WRAMC DEIS on February
7, 2014 (Federal Register, Vol. 79, No. 26). A 45-day comment period immediately followed,
during which DOS invited Federal, District and local agencies, organizations, and individuals to

Page 164

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

What is a Substantive Comment?
A substantive comment is one which suggests the modifications of an alternative; suggests the
development and evaluation of an alternative not previously considered; supplements, improves or
modifies analyses; or corrects a factual error.

40 CFR 1503.4: Response to Comments
A.

An agency preparing a final environmental impact statement shall assess and consider comments
both individually and collectively, and shall respond by one or more of the means listed below,
stating its response in the final statement. Possible responses are to:
1. Modify alternatives including the proposed action.
2. Develop and evaluate alternatives not previously given serious consideration by the agency.
3. Supplement, improve, or modify its analyses.
4. Make factual corrections.
5. Explain why the comments do not warrant further agency response, citing the sources,
authorities, or reasons which support the agency’s position and, if appropriate, indicate those
circumstances which would trigger agency reappraisal or further response.

B.

All substantive comments received on the draft statement (or summaries thereof where the
response has been exceptionally voluminous), should be attached to the final statement whether
or not the comment is thought to merit individual discussion by the agency in the text of the
statement.

C.

If changes in response to comments are minor and are confined to the responses described in
paragraphs (a)(4) and (5) of this section, agencies may write them on errata sheets and attach
them to the statement instead of rewriting the draft statement. In such cases only the comments,
the responses, and the changes and not the final statement need be circulated (Sec. 1502.19). The
entire document with a new cover sheet shall be filed as the final statement.

submit comments on the DEIS. The DOS received 12 comment letters, 10 comment cards, and
two comment e-mails. Five attendees of the March 6, 2014 public hearing offered substantive
comments as well. The public comment period on the FMC at the Former WRAMC DEIS
closed on March 31, 2014. Responses to comments on the DEIS were provided in the SDEIS.
The DOS announced the availability of the FMC at the Former WRAMC SDEIS on April 6, 2017
(Federal Register, Vol. 82, No. 65). On March 24, March 30, April 11, April 18, and May 12,
2017, DOS sent emails to the project mailing list (562 subscribers and 53 agency recipients),
advising them of the status of the study, the circulation of the SDEIS, opportunities to pose
questions to DOS and receive answers, and provide comments. A 45-day comment period

Page 165

Final Environmental Impact Statement

immediately followed publication of the SDEIS, during which DOS invited Federal, District
and local agencies, organizations and individuals to submit comments. The DOS received five
comment letters, 16 comment cards and three comment emails. Six attendees of the April 20,
2017 public hearing offered substantive comments as well. The public comment period on the
FMC at the Former WRAMC SDEIS closed on May 18, 2017.
The requirements for responding to comments received on EISs are contained in 40 CFR 1503.4.
When identifying substantive comments, DOS closely examined each letter, card, and email
and took a conservative approach to identifying substantive comments; if a remark appeared to
suggest modifying an alternative, developing and evaluating a new alternative, improving or
modifying the analysis, or making factual corrections, it was identified as a substantive comment.
Individual comments were identified and each was assigned a unique comment number. Due
to the number and similarity of some comments, similar comments were grouped together,
categorized, and responded to collectively.
The Responses to Substantive Comments Document is included in Appendix B.

Page 166

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

5.0 LIST OF PREPARERS

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

A list of primary DOS individuals who contributed to the preparation and review of this document
include:
Grace H. Choi, Program Manager, Office of Foreign Missions, Services and Special Projects
Jonathan Cohn, Realty Specialist, Office of Real Property Management
Kimberly Grant, Senior Foreign Affairs Officer, Office of Foreign Missions
Peter Guthrie, Attorney Adviser, Office of the Legal Adviser
Sharon Heiman, Project Analyst, Bureau of Administration
Geoffrey Hunt, Project Manager, Bureau of Administration
Suzanne McPartland, Program Manager, Office of Foreign Missions
Robert Sanders, Chief, Special Projects, Bureau of Administration
Clifton Seagroves, Acting Director, Office of Foreign Missions
Janice Smith, Director, Facilities Management, Bureau of Administration
The FEIS was prepared for DOS.

CARVALHO & GOOD, PLLC

Bruno P. Carvalho, ASLA, AICP
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Landscape Architecture, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 1998
◊ 20 years experience in landscape architecture, planning and urban design
Responsibilities: Landscape planning and vegetation analysis

CHA COMPANIES

Scott M. Doehla, P.E.
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Civil Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
◊ 17 years experience in geotechnical engineering
Responsibilities: Geotechnical engineering

COWEN DESIGN GROUP

Gerald A. Hish, Sr., P.E.
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Civil Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 1970
◊ 19 years experience in civil engineering design for US Navy and Federal Agency Construction,
Domestic and Foreign
◊ 34 years experience in civil engineering design
Responsibilities: Civil Engineering

Page 167

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Navid Roshan-Afshar, P.E.
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Civil Engineering, Virginia Poly Technic Institue and State University, 2005
◊ 12 years experience in civil engineering, planning and urban design
Responsibilities: Stormwater and site planning analysis

EYP ARCHITECTURE & ENGINEERING P.C.

Greg Bordynowski
Qualifications:
◊ B. Arch. Syracuse University, 1988
◊ 28 Years experience in Architectural Design, Construction, and Project Management
Responsibilities: Project Manager
Matthew S. Chalifoux, AIA
Qualifications:
◊ B. Arch. University of Notre Dame, 1981
◊ M.S. Historic Preservation program, Columbia University, 1985
◊ 37 years experience in architectural design and construction
◊ 33 years experience in historic preservation
Responsibilities: Historic preservation and Section 106 review
Charles E. Enos, AIA, LEED AP O+M
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Environmental Design, University of Oklahoma, 1977
◊ M.B.A. Management, Webster University, 1989
◊ 33 years experience in A/E project management
Responsibilities: Project management
Charles W. Jacobs Jr.
Qualifications:
◊ Master of Architectural Studies - Advanced Standing (Emerging Technology & Media),
Catholic University of America (CUA), Dec 2006
◊ Bachelor of Science in Architecture, CUA, May 2002
◊ 14 years experience in architectural design
Responsibilities: Architectural design, planning, presentation, graphics, & marketing

Page 168

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

GANNETT FLEMING, INC.

Ahmed El-Aassar, Ph.D, PE
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Civil Engineering, Cairo University, 1995
◊ M.S. Water Resources Management, University of Birmingham, 1997
◊ M.S. Environmental Engineering, The University of Central Florida, 2002
◊ Ph.D. Environmental Engineering (noise and air pollution related), The University of Central
Florida, 2006
◊ 20 years experience in noise and air quality analysis
Responsibilities: Air quality and noise analysis
Sidney Curran
Qualifications:
◊ BA, Biology, Clark University, 1976
◊ MS, Biology-Limnology, University of Minnesota, 1979
◊ 41 years experience in environmental planning and hazardous materials management
Responsibilities: Hazardous Waste analysis
Scott W. Duncanson, AICP
Qualifications:
◊ B.A. Political Science, University of New Hampshire, 1984
◊ M.U.A. Urban Affairs/Planning, Boston University, 1991
◊ 34 years experience in environmental planning, land use and socioconomics, transportation
planning, and NEPA compliance
Responsibilities: Social environment analysis
John W. Martin, RPA
Qualifications:
◊ B.A. Anthropology, University of Delaware, 1992
◊ M.A. Anthropology, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 1999
◊ Ph.D.-Level Courses in Anthropology, Rutgers, 1998-2001
◊ 38 years experience in cultural resources management
Responsibilities: Archaeology
Debra L. Plumpton, PG
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Geology, Slippery Rock State College, 1978
◊ M.S. Geological Engineering, University of Missouri-Rolla, 1980
◊ 35 years experience in geology and groundwater analysis
Responsibilities: Geology and groundwater

Page 169

Final Environmental Impact Statement

William M. Plumpton, CEP
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Environmental Resource Management, The Pennsylvania State University, 1984
◊ 34 years experience in environmental impact assessment and NEPA compliance
Responsibilities: QA/QC
Robert W. Scrafford, P.E.
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Environmental Studies, Bucknell University, 1997
◊ M.S. Environmental Sciences and Policy, Johns Hopkins University, 2003
◊ 21 years experience in environmental studies
Responsibilities: Process management and hazardous materials
Katherine E. Sharpe, AICP
Qualifications:
◊ B.A. English, Minor in Environmental Economics, Minor in Business, The Pennsylvania
State University, 1999
◊ M.P.S. Environmental Management, Cornell University, 2003
◊ 17 years experience in environmental planning, socioeconomic analysis, and NEPA compliance
Responsibilities: Social environment analysis
Craig Shirk, AICP
Qualifications:
◊ B.A. Geoenvironmental Studies, Shippensburg University, 1989
◊ M.S. Environmental Science, State University of New York, College of Environmental
Science and Forestry, 1994
◊ 25 years experience in environmental planning, transportation planning, and NEPA
compliance
Responsibilities: Social environment analysis
Russell A. Spangler
Qualifications:
◊ B.A. Communications and Media Arts, Neumann University, 2010
◊ M.S. in Publishing, Pace University, 2012
◊ 11 years experience in publication design, writing, and editing
Responsibilities: Editing, page design, and layout
Barbara W. Weedon, P.W.S.
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Biology, Shippensburg University, 1991
◊ M.S. Biology/Community Ecology, Shippensburg University, 1994
◊ 22 years experience in natural resources investigation, permitting, and NEPA compliance
Responsibilities: Transportation environmental analysis

Page 170

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

GOROVE SLADE ASSOCIATES

Erwin N. Andres, P.E.
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Civil & Environmental Engineering, Rutgers University, 1994
◊ 24 years experience in transportation planning and traffic engineering analysis
Responsibilities: Transportation planning and traffic engineering analysis
James W. Watson, PTP
Qualifications:
◊ M.A. Transportation Policy Operations & Logistics, George Mason University, 2007
◊ Bachelor of Aviation Management, Auburn University, 2001
◊ 13 years experience in transportation planning and traffic engineering analysis
Responsibilities: Transportation planning and traffic engineering analysis

JONES LANG LASALLE AMERICAS, INC.

Jonathan Walk
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Finance, International Business, Georgetown University McDonough School of
Business, 2006
◊ 12 years of real estate development economics and market analysis experience
Responsibilities: Economic impact analysis

JACOBS

Alexander C. Carroll, AIA, LEED BD+C
Qualifications:
◊ B.S. Architecture, University of Virginia, 1989
◊ M.Arch. Architecture, Rice University, 1993
◊ 29 years experience in architectural design
◊ 13 years experience in campus master planning
Responsibilities: Master planning

Page 171

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 172

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

6.0 DISTRIBUTION LIST
This EIS is distributed to Federal and District agencies with direct or indirect jurisdiction by
law or special expertise and to other parties that may be interested.

ELECTED OFFICIALS

U.S. House of Representatives
Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton
2136 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515

U.S. FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
John M. Fowler, Executive Director
National Building Museum
401 F Street NW, Suite 308
Washington, DC 20001-2637

National Capital Planning Commission
Urban Design & Plan Review Division
Diane Sullivan, Director
401 9th Street NW, North Lobby, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20004

The Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Federal Property Management Section
Katherine, Kerr, Program Analyst
National Building Museum
401 F Street NW, Suite 308
Washington, DC 20001-2637

National Capital Planning Commission
Urban Design & Plan Review Division
Lee Webb, Historic Preservation Specialist
401 9th Street NW, North Lobby, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20004

National Capital Planning Commission
Marcel Acosta, Executive Director
401 9th Street NW, North Lobby, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20004

National Park Service
National Capital Regional Office
Tammy Stidham, Chief, Planning
1100 Ohio Drive SW
Washington, DC 20024

National Capital Planning Commission
Urban Design & Plan Review Division
Matthew Flis, AICP, Senior Urban Designer
401 9th Street NW, North Lobby, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20004

National Park Service
National Capital Regional Office
Rick Obernesser, Acting Regional Director
1100 Ohio Drive SW
Washington, DC 20024

National Capital Planning Commission
Urban Design & Plan Review Division
Carlton Hary, AICP, Urban Planner
401 9th Street NW, North Lobby, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20004

National Park Service
Rock Creek Park
Julia Washburn, Superintendant
3545 Williamsburg Lane
Washington, DC 20008

Page 173

Final Environmental Impact Statement

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Operations Division, Regulatory Branch
Beth Bachur, Permit Process Program Manager
City Crescent Building, CENAB-OPR
10 South Howard Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
U.S. Commission of Fine Arts
Sarah Batcheler, AIA, LEED AP, Architect,
Shipstead-Luce Act
National Building Museum
401 F Street NW, Suite 312
Washington, DC 20001-2728
U.S. Commission of Fine Arts
Frederick J. Lindstrom, Assistant Secretary
National Building Museum
401 F Street NW, Suite 312
Washington, DC 20001-2728
U.S. Commission of Fine Arts
Thomas Luebke, FAIA, Secretary
National Building Museum
401 F Street NW, Suite 312
Washington, DC 20001-2728
U.S. Department of Interior
Office of Environmental Policy & Compliance
Carol Braegelmann, Team Leader
Natural Resources Management Team
1849 C Street, NW, MS 5538
Washington, DC 20240
U.S. Department of Transportation
Federal Highway Administration
District of Columbia Division
Michael Hicks, Environmental Engineer
1990 K Street NW, Suite 510
Washington, DC 20006

TRIBES

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Federal Activities
NEPA Compliance Division
Kelly Knight, Director
William Jefferson Clinton South
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20460
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Environmental Programs
Barbara J. Rudnick, NEPA Team Leader
1650 Arch Street Mail Code: 3EA30
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2029
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Federal Activities, EIS Filing Section
Robert Tomiak, Director
William Jefferson Clinton South
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20460
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Bryan Arroyo, Assistant Director for
International Affairs
1849 C. Street NW, Mail Stop: 3345 MIB
Washington, DC 20240
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Chesapeake Bay Ecological Services Field Office
Genevieve LaRouche, Field Supervisor
177 Admiral Cochrane Drive
Anapolis, MD 21401-7307

According to the Native American Consultation Database, the District of Columbia does not
have federally recognized tribes.

Page 174

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Council of the District of Columbia
Brandon T. Todd, Ward 4 Councilmember
John A. Wilson Building
1350 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 105
Washington, DC 20004

DC Office of Planning
Historic Preservation Office
Dr. Ruth Trocolli, City Archaeologist
1100 4th Street SW, Suite E650
Washington, DC 20024

DC Department of Energy and Environment
Tommy Wells, Director
1200 First Street NE, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20002
DC Department of Parks and Recreation
Keith A. Anderson, Director
1250 U Street NW, 2nd floor
Washington, DC 20009

The Executive Office of the Mayor
The Honorable Muriel E. Bowser, Mayor
John A. Wilson Building
1350 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20004

DC Department of Public Works
Christopher Shorter, Director
Frank D. Reeves Municipal Center
2000 14th Street NW, 6th Floor
Washington, DC 20009
DC Department of Transportation
Jeff Marootian, Director
55 M Street SE, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20003
DC Office of Planning
Historic Preservation Office
Steve Callott, Deputy Preservation Officer
1100 4th Street SW, Suite E650
Washington, DC 20024
DC Office of Planning
Historic Preservation Office
Tim Dennée, Architectural Historian
1100 4th Street SW, Suite E650
Washington, DC 20024
DC Office of Planning
Historic Preservation Office
Eric D. Shaw, Director
1100 4th Street SW, Suite E650
Washington, DC 20024

DC Water and Sewer Authority
George Hawkins, Esq., CEO & General Manager
5000 Overlook Avenue SW
Washington, DC 20032
DC Office of Zoning
Sara Benjamin Bardin, Director
441 4th Street NW, Suite 210
Washington, DC 20001
Office of the City Administrator
Rashad M. Young, City Administrator
John A. Wilson Building
1350 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 513
Washington, DC 20004
Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and
Economic Development
Walter Reed Local Redevelopment Authority
Randall Clarke, Director of Walter Reed LRA
1350 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Suite 317
Washington, DC 20004
Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and
Economic Development
Bryan T. Kenner, Deputy Mayor
John A. Wilson Building
1350 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Suite 317
Washington, DC 20004

Page 175

Final Environmental Impact Statement

Office of the State Superintendent of
Education for the District of Columbia
Hanseul Kang, State Superintendent of
Education
810 1st Street NE, 9th Floor
Washington, DC 20002

ADVISORY NEIGHBORHOOD COMMISSIONS
Advisory Neighborhood Commission 4A
Stephen Whatley, Chairperson
1315 Fern Street NW
Washington, DC 20012

Advisory Neighborhood Commission 4B
André R. Carley, Chair
1405 9th Street NW
Washington, DC 20012

LIBRARY
Juanita E. Thornton-Shepherd Park Library
Melinda MacCall
7420 Georgia Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20012

Takoma Park Neighborhood Library
Michelle Sellars
416 Cedar Street NW
Washington, DC 20012

Petworth Neighborhood Library
Jeffrey Neher, Manager
4200 Kansas Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20011

OTHER

The Alliance to Preserve The Civil War
Defenses of Washington
Loretta Neumann, President
7124 Piney Branch Road NW
Washington, DC 20012
Brightwood Community Association
Anthony M. Briggs, President
P.O. Box 55104, Brightwood Station
Washington, DC 20011
Children's National Medical Center
Marshall L. Summar, M.D., FACMG, FAAP
Chief: Division of Genetics and Metabolism
111 Michigan Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20010-2970

Page 176

Children's National Medical Center
Charles Weinstein, Esq.
Executive Vice President
Chief Real Estate and Facility Officer
111 Michigan Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20010-2970
DC Preservation League
Rebecca Miller, Executive Director
1221 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 5A
Washington, DC 20036
Metro Washington Council of Governments
Chuck Bean, Executive Director
777 North Capitol Street NE, Suite 300
Washington, DC 20002

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

The National Trust for Historic Preservation
Stephanie K. Meeks, President and CEO
2600 Virginia Ave NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20037

The Committee of 100 on the Federal City
Stephen A. Hansen, Chair
945 G Street NW
Washington, DC 20001

Rock Creek Park
Julia Washburn, Superintendent
3545 Williamsburg Lane
Washington, DC 20008

Walter Reed Society
COL (R) John Pierce, President
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center
8901 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 303
Bethesda, MD 20889-5600

Shepherd Park Citizens Association
Mark Pattison, President
P.O. Box 55255
Washington, DC 20040-5255

Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority
Paul J. Wiedefeld, General Manager and CEO
Jackson Graham Building
600 5th Street NW
Washington, DC 20001

Page 177

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 178

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

7.0 REFERENCES
Cabrera Services. (2007, January). Final Historical Site Assessment and Addendum to the
Environmental Condition of Property, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Baltimore District. In: 2013 ECP Update Appendix Q-1.
Council on Environmental Quality. (1997, December 10). Environmental Justice Guidance Under
the National Environmental Policy Act. Accessed February 21, 2013. http://www.epa.gov/
compliance/ej/resources/policy/ej_guidance_nepa_ceq1297.pdf
Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual. Vicksburg, MS: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Waterways Experiment Station, Environmental Laboratory, 1987.
Craig, M. A. (2013, November 19). [Telephone Interview].
District of Columbia Department of Transportation (DDOT). “DC Transit Future System Plan.’
April 2010.
District of Columbia Department of Employment Services. “Top 200 Major Employers in the
District of Columbia: 2016 Directory.” Accessed January 2017. http://does.dc.gov/ sites/
default/files/dc/sites/does/publication/attachments/DOES_Top200.pdf
District of Columbia. GIS Data Catalog. Accessed December 12, 2012. http://data.dc.gov/
Main_DataCatalog.aspx
District of Columbia Municipal Regulations and DC Register. (2010). "Water Quality
Standards". Accessed March 21, 2017. http://dcregs.dc.gov/Gateway/ChapterHome.
aspx?ChapterNumber=21-11
District of Columbia Office of Planning. “Upper Georgia Avenue: Great Streets Redevelopment
Plan.” July 10, 2008.
— “Walter Reed Army Medical Center Small Area Plan.” District of Columbia. April 30, 2013.
Accessed February 2016. http://www.walterreedlra.com/publications-documents/small-areaplan/
District of Columbia Office of the Chief Technology Officer (DCOCTO). “Geographic
Information System.” District of Columbia. Accessed 2012. http://octo.dc.gov/DC/OCTO/
District of Columbia Office of Zoning. (2016). “DC Office of Zoning (DCOZ).” District of
Columbia. Accessed February 2016. http://www.dcoz.dc.gov/main.shtm
District of Columbia Public Schools. “Find Your Assigned Schools.” DC Public Schools,
Washington, DC. 2011. Accessed 2012. http://dcps.dc.gov/DCPS/

Page 179

Final Environmental Impact Statement

District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority (DCWASA). “Long Term Control Plan Consent
Decree Status Report: Quarter No. 4 - 2012.” Clean Rivers Project Quarterly Status Reports.
January 2013. http://www.dcwater.com/news/publications/ Final%202012-Q4%20LTCP%20
CD%20Quarterly%20Rpt.pdf
EA Engineering, Science, and Technology, Inc. (2006, April). PCB Sampling of In-Ground
Transformer Vaults and Transformer Pads for Walter Reed Army Medical Center-Main Post,
Washington, D.C. In: 2015 ECP Update Appendix D-6.08-8.
Gorove/Slade. March 3,2017. Draft Comprehensive Transportation Review. U.S. Department
of State Foreign Missions Center, Washington, DC.
— June 2, 2014. Draft Transportation Impact Study. U.S. Department of State Foreign Missions
Center, Washington, DC.
Government of the District of Columbia (GDC). (2012, September) Tax Rates and Tax Burdens,
Washington Metropolitan Area. Accessed July 10, 2013. http://cfo.dc.gov/sites/default/files/
dc/sites/ocfo/publication/attachments/Tax%20Rates%20and%20Burdens%202011%20
Washington-Metro.pdf. Johnston, P. M. Geology and Ground-water Resources of Washington,
D. C., and Vicinity. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1964.
— (2010, September). Climate of Opportunity: A Climate Action Plan for the District of Columbia.
Online https://doee.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/ddoe/publication/attachments/ClimateOfOpportunity_web.pdf
Johnston, P. M. (1964). Geology and ground-water resources of Washington, D. C., and vicinity
(U.S. Geological Survey). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print Office.
Level2Development. “PoPville – Construction Starts at Takoma Central.” PoPville Construction
Starts at Takoma Central Comments. Accessed February 05, 2013. http://www.popville.
com/2012/12/construction-starts-at-takoma-central/
Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (MWCOG). Housing and Planning:
Metropolitan Washington Growth Trends. Accessed July 10, 2013. http://www.mwcog.org/
planning/planning/trends/
— (2015a). “Round 8.4 Cooperative Forecasting: Employment Forecasts to 2040 by Traffic
Analysis Zone.”
— (2015b). “Round 8.4 Cooperative Forecasting: Population and Household Forecasts to 2040
by Traffic Analysis Zone.”
Morris Wade Associates. (2013, September 5). U.S. Department of State Rough Order of
Magnitude (ROM) 65% Cost Report.

Page 180

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

National Capital Planning Commission. (2006). “The Comprehensive Plan for the National
Capital.” National Capital Planning Commission. Accessed October 2012. http://www.ncpc.
gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/Planning(Tr2)/ComprehensivePlan.html
National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC). “Foreign Missions in the District of Columbia
Future Location Analysis.” National Capital Planning Commission. 2003. Accessed
November 2013. http://www.ncpc.gov/DocumentDepot/Publications/ForeignMissions/
Foreign_Missions_Location.pdf
National Park Service. (2014) "National Register Bulletin". Accessed March 2017. https://www.
nps.gov/nr/publications/bulletins/nrb38/nrb38%20introduction.htm
— “Things to Do – Rock Creek Park.” National Park Service. January 14, 2013. Accessed
January 18, 2013. http://www.nps.gov/rocr/planyourvisit/ things2do.htm
“NOAA’s National Weather Service - National Climate.” NOAA’s National Weather Service National Climate. Accessed January 23, 2013. http://www.nws.noaa.gov/climate/
“Physiographic Province Map of Maryland, Delaware, and the District of Columbia.”
Physiographic Province Maps. Accessed January 23, 2013. http://md.water.usgs.gov/
groundwater/physiomaps/
Smith, Horace. Soil Survey of District of Columbia. [Washington]: Soil Conservation Service,
1976.
“Species by County Report.” U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Accessed January 23, 2013. http://
ecos.fws.gov/tess_public/countySearch!speciesByCountyReport.action?fips=11001
“Threatened and Endangered Species Review Response.” District Department of the Environment
(DDOE) to DOS. Letter. November 27, 2012.
Tidewater, Inc., June 2007. Draft Final Report – PCB Contaminated Soil Removal – Building
40, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C.
“Tree Regulations.” District Department of Transportation. Accessed January 23, 2013. http://
ddot.dc.gov/DC/DDOT/On+Your+Street/Urban+Forestry/Tree+Guidelines+-+Protecting+
Trees+During+Construction
Total Environmental Concepts, Inc. (2014, September 15). Polychlorinated Biphenyl Cleanup
Report – Building 40 Electrical Pads, Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington,
D.C. In: 2015 ECP Update Appendix D-6.08-12.

Page 181

Final Environmental Impact Statement

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2011, February). Fact sheet: Climate
change science - the status of climate change science today. Online. https://unfccc.int/files/
press/backgrounders/application/pdf/press_factsh_science.pdf
U.S. Army Garrison Walter Reed Directorate of Public Works. (2004, July 7). Environmental
Baseline Survey Enhanced Use Lease (Buildings 40 & 18), Walter Reed Army Medical
Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
U.S. Army Garrison Walter Reed Environmental Office (2006a, December 15). BRAC 2005
Environmental Condition of Property Report [PDF], Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Main
Post, Washington, DC (without Appendix L): U.S. Department of the Army.
— (2006b). FY2006 – Installation Action Plan, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C.
— (2007). Letter from Peter Garibaldi (WRAMC) to Sharon Hamilton (D.C. Environmental
Health Administration, Underground Storage Tank Division) concerning WRAMC tanks
MP-32 and MP-31.
— (2010, May). Update to the U.S. Army BRAC 2005 Environmental Condition of Property
Report [PDF], Water Reed Army Medical Center, Main Post, Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of the Army.
— (2013, April 23). Update to the U.S. Army BRAC 2006 and 2010 Update Environmental
Condition of Property Report [PDF], Water Reed Army Medical Center, Main Post,
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Army.
— (2015, February). Environmental Condition of Property Update Report, Walter Reed Field
Activity, Washington, DC [PDF] (without some appendices): U.S. Department of the Army.
U.S. Army Public Health Command. (2011, February). Soil and Groundwater Sampling Report
No. 38-EH-0D93-10, Building 40 Transformer Site, Walter Reed Army Medical Center,
Washington, DC, 20 June 2010 – 08 January 2011. In: 2015 ECP Update Appendix D-6.08-2.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (January 2016). Regional and State Unemployment – 2015-2016
Annual Averages. Accessed January 2016. http://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/srgune.pdf
U.S. Census Bureau. (2001). “Census 2000.” American Factfinder. Accessed February 21, 2013.
http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml
­— (2015). “American Community Survey, 2010–2014.” American FactFinder. Accessed January
2016. http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml
— (2011). “Unit of Analysis.” Accessed July 10, 2013. http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/
housing/housing_patterns/unitofanalysis.html

Page 182

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

U.S. Department of State. February 28, 2017. Memorandum of Agreement between The National
Capital Planning Commission and The United States Department of State, Office of Foreign
Missions Regarding the Review of Chancery Development at the Foreign Missions Center.
— Foreign Missions Center Master Plan 35% Submission-Analysis Report. Report. 2013.
— Foreign Missions Center Master Plan Existing Conditions Report. Report. 2012.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 2016. National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS). Online: http://www3.epa.gov/airquality/greenbook/ancl.html. Accessed February
2016.
— October 2014. RCRA Orientation Manual 2014. Online. http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/
files/2015-07/documents/rom.pdf Accessed February 2016.
— (1998, April). Final Guidance For Incorporating Environmental Justice Concerns in EPA’s
NEPA Compliance Analyses. Accessed February 21, 2013. http://www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/resources/policy/ej_guidance_nepa_epa0498.pdf
— (1974). Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health
and Welfare with an Adequate Margin of Safety. Accessed March 2017. https://nepis.epa.gov/
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). “Division of Migratory Bird Managment .” Division of
Migratory Bird Managment. Accessed January 24, 2013. http://www.fws.gov/ migratorybirds/
— "Hay's Spring Amphipod (Stygobromus hayi)". 2017. Accessed March 2017 from https://
ecos.fws.gov/ecp0/profile/speciesProfile?sId=8410
U.S. Geological Survey. (1967) “Engineering Geology of the Northeast Corridor, Washington, D.C.
to Boston, Massachusetts: Bedrock Geology, USGS Miscellaneous Geologic Investigations
Map I-514-A”.
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. (2012, June 20). Letter from Elizabeth Ullrich (NRC) to
Susan Annicelli (WRAMC) concerning License No. 08-01738- 02. Department of the Army,
License Amendment, Control No. 577436. In: 2013 ECP Update Appendix Q-4.
— (2005, March 10). Letter from James P. Dwyer (NRC) to John R. Mercier (WRAMC)
concerning License No. 08-01738-02. Department of the Army, Application for Licensing
Action, Control No. 135964. In: 2013 ECP Update Appendix Q-6.
— (2004, May 26). Letter from James P. Dwyer (NRC) to John R. Mercier (WRAMC) concerning
License No. 08-01738-02. Department of the Army, Application for Licensing Action, Control
No. 133540. In: 2013 ECP Update Appendix Q-6.

Page 183

Final Environmental Impact Statement

“Walmart Washington D.C.” Walmart Washington DC. Accessed February 05, 2013. http://
washingtondc.walmartcommunity.com/georgia-avenue/
White House, Office of the Press Secretary. Executive Order 13693: Planning for Federal
Sustainability in the Next Decade. Online. https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-pressoffice/2015/03/19/executive-order-planning-federal-sustainability-next-decade Accessed
February 2016.

Page 184

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

8.0 INDEX
A

I

Air Quality: 19, 77–80, 139.
Alternatives: 23–33.
Action: 23, 25–26, 31–33, 155–161.
No Action: 23, 26–27, 35, 38, 39, 41, 43, 44, 46,
47, 48, 50, 53, 67, 68, 72, 74, 75, 77, 79–80,
83, 92, 94, 95, 96, 101, 105, 121, 127, 128,
129–131, 134, 136, 137, 138, 140, 149.
Selected Action: xii, 23, 26–30, 39, 41, 43, 44,
46, 47, 48, 50–51, 56, 57, 58, 67, 68, 72–73,
74, 75–77, 79–80, 83, 92, 94, 95, 96, 101,
105, 121, 122, 127, 128, 129, 131, 134, 136,
137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 149.
Archaeological Resources: xxxv, 124–127.

Income: 98–100, 102–106.
Indirect Impacts: 101, 141–142.

C
Chancery: xxxv, 1, 16, 27, 102.
Cultural Resources: xxxvi, 25, 26, 31, 95, 106–
128.
Cumulative Impacts: xxxvi, 141, 142–148.

D
Demographics: 96–102.

E
Economics: 35, 96–102.
Employment: 97, 99–102.
Endangered Species: xxxvii, 19, 47–48.
Energy: 16, 137–138, 148–149.

F
Floodplains: xxxvii, 20, 43–44.
Foreign Missions: xxxviii, 1, 2, 23, 26–27, 75, 138,
141.
Foreign Missions Center: xii, 16–18, 23–33, 55,
56, 94, 96, 102, 108, 108–111, 121, 138–
137, 138, 154–161.

G
Greenhouse Gas: xxxviii, 137, 147–149.
Groundwater: 43.

H

J
Jobs: 1, 98–100.

L
Labor Force: 96–102.
Land Use: 18, 88–96, 141.

M
Minority and Disadvantaged Populations: 102–
106.
Mitigation: xxxv, xxxvii, xxxix, 23, 35, 44, 74,
106–105, 109, 123, 163.

N
Noise: xxxix, 80–83, 86–87, 139–140.

P
Parks: 72, 88, 93, 94–95, 96, 121, 122, 156.
Population: 21, 97, 98–99, 101, 102–106.

S
Scoping: xl, 109–110, 151.
Security: 17, 24, 95.
Surface Water: 18, 39–43, 142.

T
Threatened Species: xli, 19, 47–48.
Traffic: xxxv, xxxvi, xxxviii, 17, 31, 48–77, 79–80,
80–81, 83, 84–85, 140, 140–141, 154.
Trees: 16, 33, 44–47, 151.

V
Vegetation: 16, 44–47.
Visual Resources: 95–96.

W
Water Quality: 20, 39–44, 142, 149.

Hazardous Waste: 128–137, 134–135, 152.
Historic Resource: 16, 26, 107, 109–110, 111–121,
161–162, 162.
Housing: 98, 101.
Human Environment: xxxvii, 20, 140–141.

Page 185

Final Environmental Impact Statement

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 186

Appendix A

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of the Army,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office, and the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Closure and Transfer of Select Parcels of
Walter Reed Army Medical Center
Washington, District of Columbia

WHEREAS, the Department of the Army (“Army”) has closed Walter Reed Army
Medical Center (“WRAMC”) as an active military installation and is proceeding with
disposal through, economic development conveyances, public benefit conveyances,
competitive sales, negotiated sales, or a combination thereof of the Property in a manner
consistent with the requirements of the 2005 Base Realignment and Closure Commission
(“BRAC”) thereby making the undertaking subject to review under Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (“NHPA”) of 1966, 16 U.S.C. § 470f and its
implementing regulations, 36 C.F.R. Part 800; and
WHEREAS, WRAMC Buildings 8 and 9 as shown in Attachment A (excluding the land)
are not part of this undertaking due to an existing fifty-year ground lease through a
partnership between the Army and a private entity that complies with Section 106 under a
2003 Programmatic Agreement (“PA”) between WRAMC and the District of Columbia
(“District” or “D.C.”) State Historic Preservation Office (“SHPO”) for the Privatization
of Family Housing at WRAMC, Main Section; and
WHEREAS, the Army has defined the Area of Potential Effect (“APE”) of this
undertaking to be the entire installation and an area extending one block beyond the
installation’s perimeter as shown in Attachment B; and
WHEREAS, the Army has determined that the undertaking will have an adverse effect
on WRAMC identified historic properties (Attachment C), which are eligible for listing
in the National Register of Historic Places (“National Register”), and has consulted with
the District SHPO pursuant to 36 C.F.R. Part 800; and
WHEREAS, interested members of the public have been provided opportunities to
comment on identification of historic properties through public meetings and information
provided on the internet at http://www.hqda.army.mil/acsim/brac/nhpa_wramc.html and
the opportunity to comment on the effects this undertaking will have on historic
properties at WRAMC; and
WHEREAS, the Army consulted with the SHPO to conclude there are no federally
recognized tribes in the District, Maryland or Virginia that reasonably have documented
ties to lands associated with WRAMC, nor are there any tribes who have been relocated
to a different area that reasonably have documented ties to lands associated with
WRAMC; and
1

WHEREAS, the Walter Reed Local Redevelopment Authority (“WRLRA”) has
prepared a redevelopment plan for the Army to consider in the disposal of property not
transferred to another federal agency as shown in Attachment B; and
WHEREAS, the Army, in consultation with the SHPO, has invited Advisory
Neighborhood Commission 4A, Advisory Neighborhood Commission 4B, the District
Administrator’s Office, the Alliance to Preserve the Civil War Defenses of Washington,
the Brightwood Community Association, the Committee of 100 on the Federal City, the
D.C. Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development, the D.C.
Preservation League, the D.C. Office of Planning, the U.S. Department of State (“DOS”),
the National Capital Planning Commission, the National Park Service - Rock Creek Park,
the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Shepherd Park Citizens Association, the
U.S. Commission of Fine Arts, the Ward 4 D.C. Council Member, the WRLRA, and the
Walter Reed Society to be consulting parties in this PA and the opportunity to sign as
concurring parties; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 C.F.R. § 800.6(a)(1), the Army has notified the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (“ACHP”) of its adverse effect determination,
providing the specified documentation, and the ACHP has chosen to participate in the
consultation pursuant to 36 C.F.R. § 800.6(a)(1)(iii); and
WHEREAS, the District of Columbia Preservation League has submitted an application
for historic landmark or historic district designation for WRAMC to the SHPO and this
application will serve as the basis of the Army’s continuing refinement and submission of
a nomination as the owner of the property; and
WHEREAS, the Army’s disposal plan for the property was modified several times since
the 2005 BRAC recommendation and the undertaking could not be defined for the
purposes of Section 106 consultation until the disposition boundaries were established in
June 2011; and
WHEREAS, the DOS is designated to receive a select portion of the installation in a
transfer between federal agencies as shown in Attachment B, which is not deemed an
undertaking under the NHPA and is not part of this Section 106 consultation or
agreement, and any DOS projects that constitute undertakings will be subject to separate
Section 106 consultation with DOS as the agency official pursuant to 36 C.F.R. §
800.2(a); and
WHEREAS, the Army shall provide interim maintenance to historic properties listed in
Attachment C until transfer out of federal control but shall not replace or repair properties
where National Register eligibility is lost; and
WHEREAS, Building 18 is located outside the main WRAMC campus, is not a historic
property and therefore may be immediately transferred out of federal control without
restriction; and
2

NOW, THEREFORE, the Army, the SHPO and the ACHP agree the undertaking shall
be implemented in accordance with the following stipulations in order to take into
account the effects of the undertaking on historic properties.
Stipulations
The Army shall ensure the following measures are carried out:
I.

Interim Property Maintenance. The Army shall avoid adverse effects to
WRAMC historic properties prior to transfer of any parcel containing a
historic property by including the following measures in contracting
instruments for its interim maintenance agreements:
A. Keep historic buildings in a weather-tight condition.
B. Provide historic properties with physical security and fire protection.
C. Prevent undue historic building deterioration by:
1. Maintaining air circulation and ventilation.
2. Keeping interiors of buildings with operational climate control
systems at time of closure at temperatures between fifty-five (55)
and eighty-five (85) degrees Fahrenheit.
3. Providing pest control as needed.
D. Conduct daily interior and exterior inspections, looking for signs of loss
of integrity by damage from weather, physical security breaches, or
undue facility deterioration.
E. Should damage (where the property retains its ability to convey its
significance) occur to the character-defining features of any historic
property, to structural components, or to features that would interfere
with compliance with subsections A, B and C above, the Army shall
notify the SHPO of the damage and repair historic properties to the
existing condition on the effective date of this PA based upon the
WRAMC Existing Conditions Document per Stipulation VIII. Repairs
shall follow the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
Rehabilitation of Historic Properties (Standards) as listed in Attachment
D. Should damage occur that affects the property’s ability to convey its
significance, the Army shall immediately notify the SHPO and develop a
mitigation plan.
F. Report any damage and repairs to be included in the annual status reports
per Stipulation XIII.
3

II.

Archaeological Identification and Treatment
A. General.
1. Any archaeological investigations conducted by the Army
shall utilize consultants meeting the Secretary of the
Interior’s “ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORIC
PRESERVATION: Secretary of the Interior's Standards
and Guidelines [As Amended and Annotated].”
(Professional Qualifications) and follow the SHPO’s 1998
“Guidelines for Conducting Archaeological Investigations
in the District of Columbia” (as amended), which are
available on the SHPO website for reporting, collections
curation, and records curation.
2. The Army is responsible for conducting phased
archaeological investigations for the parcel being
transferred out of federal ownership. The sequential phases
of investigations are comprised of: Phase IA
archaeological assessment (archival investigation),
geoarchaeological investigation, Phase IB archaeological
identification survey, and Phase II evaluation testing. Not
all phases of investigations may be merited and the
necessity of the subsequent phases will be determined
based on results of each successive phase, in consultation
with the SHPO. A work plan for each phase of
investigation will be submitted to the SHPO for review and
comment before works commences. The phases may be
combined into fewer studies to reduce the numbers of work
plans and reports produced and submitted for review.
Reporting for each phase may be individual or combined to
produce fewer reports. A state site form and
Determinations of Eligibility (DOE) will be produced for
each resource identified during the phased investigations.
3. All resulting artifact collections, images, field notes,
records, digital data, and geospatial data generated by the
archaeological investigations pursuant to this PA will be
curated by the Army in accordance with 36 C.F.R. 79.
4. The Army will make every effort to complete all
investigations pursuant to this PA prior to the transfer of
any parcels to non-federal entities. However, should the
Army transfer any parcel to a non-federal entity prior to
completion of any investigation in this stipulation, the
Army shall ensure that it will have unencumbered site
4

access to complete historic property identification efforts as
a condition of the transfer.
5. NHPA compliance for WRAMC lands transferred to
another federal agency will be the responsibility of the
receiving agency.
B. Phase IA Archaeological Assessment - Archival Investigation.
1. Within one (1) year of the execution of this PA, the Army
shall conduct an archival investigation for the entire
installation to determine what past land disturbance
activities have been conducted there that could affect the
preservation of archaeological remains. This archival
investigation will utilize Army and non-Army records to
document previous ground disturbance at WRAMC from
construction and fill activities and buried utilities. These
findings will be used to make recommendations about
which WRAMC lands are believed to retain sufficient soil
integrity to merit geoarchaeological soil assessments.
2. The archival investigation shall also collect and analyze
oral and documentary history sources describing locations
where prehistoric or Civil War-related artifacts have been
previously found at WRAMC.
3. A draft report containing the findings and
recommendations of the archival study shall be submitted
to the SHPO for a thirty (30) calendar-day period of
review and comment prior to completion of the document.
4. The final report shall be distributed to all concurring and
signatory parties, except the ACHP, to this agreement.
C. Geoarchaeological Soil Assessment.
1. Following completion of the Archival Investigation report,
the Army shall conduct a geoarchaeological assessment
only of those WRAMC lands leaving federal ownership
that were recommended as retaining sufficient soils
integrity to merit such an investigation in consultation
with the SHPO . Geoarcheological investigations of lands
being transferred to another federal agency shall be the
responsibility of the receiving federal agency.
2. The goal of the geoarchaeological soil assessment is to
identify whether any intact soil deposits or paleosols are
5

present that may contain prehistoric or early historic era
archaeological resources. The results of the
geoarchaeological soil assessment will be used to make
recommendations about the need for and/or locations
where Phase I archaeological testing shall be conducted.
3. The Army, in consultation with the SHPO, shall determine
what investigative methodologies shall be used to conduct
the geoarchaeological soil assessment. The methodologies
could include backhoe trenching, power or hand augers, or
shovel tests, solely or in combination. The testing
methodologies to be used will be based in large part on the
findings of the archival research. The investigations will
proceed from the ground surface down to sterile soil
horizons which have no potential to contain intact
archaeological resources. A work plan for the
investigation will be submitted to the SHPO for review
and comment before the investigation commences. All
investigations will comply with OSHA safety guidelines.
4. A technical report of findings and recommendations will
be prepared for the geoarchaeological soil assessment. The
report will clearly explain whether Phase I archaeological
site testing is merited and if so, will delineate those areas
recommended for this level of testing. If Phase IB
archaeological site testing is recommended, the report will
also make if possible recommendations about the types of
test excavation techniques that would be appropriate for
the site(s) (shovel tests, 1x1 meter units, backhoe
trenching). A draft report documenting the findings and
recommendations of the geoarchaeological soil
investigations shall be submitted to the SHPO for a thirty
(30) calendar-day period of review and comment prior to
completion of the document.
5. The final report shall be distributed to all concurring and
signatory parties, except the ACHP, to this agreement.
D. Phase IB Archeological Testing.
1. In the event that the archival research and/or
geoarchaeological soil assessment indicates that one or
more of the areas tested have potential to possess intact
archeological remains, the Army , will conduct a Phase I
archaeological investigation of those areas to determine
whether intact archaeological strata and remains are
present. The testing strategy including methodologies, unit
6

types and placement will be determined in consultation
with the SHPO. Controlled metal detector survey may be
used to locate Civil War-era deposits. Any archaeological
resources or sites identified during the survey will be
registered and assigned a state site number. Any identified
archaeological sites will be treated as potentially eligible
for the NRHP by the Army and protected from looting or
destruction until they are evaluated. A work plan for the
investigation will be submitted to the SHPO for review
and comment prior to commencement of the study.
2. At the completion of Phase IB archaeological testing field
investigations, a report of findings and recommendations
for future work will be prepared as well as a state site form
as necessary. The report shall be submitted to the SHPO
for a thirty (30) calendar-day period of review and
comment prior to completion of the document.
3. The final report shall be distributed to all concurring and
signatory parties, except the ACHP, to this agreement.
E. Phase II Archaeological Evaluation Survey.
1. The Army will conduct a Phase II archaeological NRHP
evaluation investigation of archaeological sites identified
during the Phase IB investigations if features or
reasonably intact cultural soil horizons are present. The
Phase II testing strategy including unit types and
placement will be determined in consultation with the
SHPO. A work plan for the investigation will be
submitted to the SHPO for review and comment prior to
commencement of the study.
2. At the completion of Phase II archaeological field
investigations, a report of findings, GIS survey data,
amended site forms, and DOEs will be prepared. The
report shall be submitted to the SHPO for a thirty (30)
calendar-day period of review and comment prior to
completion of the document.
3. The final report shall be distributed to all concurring and
signatory parties, except the ACHP, to this agreement.
F. Treatment. Archaeological sites that are identified as ineligible for the
NRHP will not merit further treatment or protection by the Army. Sites
that retain integrity as reported in the Phase II archaeological survey
and so reported in a DOE will be treated by the Army as being eligible
7

for the National Register. These eligible resources will be included in
the National Register nomination and nominated for listing in the DC
Inventory of Historic Places. If NRHP eligible archaeological resources
are identified after the WRAMC nomination is filed, they will be listed
on the NRHP through incorporation in the amendment process per
Stipulation III.D of this PA.
III.

National Register of Historic Places Nomination and Application for
Listing in the DC Inventory of Historic Sites
A. Submission. Within nine (9) months of execution of this PA, the Army shall
submit an Application for [DC] Historic Landmark or Historic District
Designation concurrently with a National Register nomination that will
include all historic properties identified in Attachment C.
B. Review Copy. The Army shall make a review copy of the nomination
available to all signatory and concurring parties, except the ACHP, and
provide a thirty (30) calendar-day comment period prior to submission.
C. Nomination Hearing. Within two (2) months of receiving the Army’s
Application for Historic Landmark or Historic District Designation and the
NRHP nomination, SHPO shall schedule the NRHP nomination for hearing
by the D.C. Historic Preservation Review Board, which serves as the State
Review Board for the District of Columbia.
D. Archaeology. If the NRHP nomination is submitted to the SHPO prior to
completion of the archaeological identification, the Army shall submit to the
SHPO an amendment to the NRHP nomination that includes any
archaeological resources determined to be eligible for the National Register
independently or as a resource contributing to the character of a WRAMC
historic district.

IV.

Assessing Effects of the WRLRA Reuse Plan
A. Within sixty (60) calendar days of the Army’s receipt of the HUD Submitted
WRLRA Reuse Plan or the signature of this document, whichever is later, an
individual meeting the Professional Qualifications will assess effects of the
plan on historic properties, including archaeological resources and make
recommendations to the Army.
B. The Army shall then concurrently notify all concurring and signatory parties,
with the exception of the ACHP, of its findings, based upon the qualified
professional’s recommendations via the interested consulting party’s
preferred form of communication (postal or email) and seek comments
regarding its findings.

8

C. The Army shall forward all comments received from consulting and
signatory parties concerning its findings to the SHPO via email upon receipt
and copy furnish the consulting and signatory parties, except the ACHP. The
SHPO shall respond to the Army’s findings within thirty (30) calendar days.
1. Should the Army and the SHPO concur that the WRLRA
redevelopment plan has no adverse effects on historic properties,
the Army shall notify the SHPO in writing and all concurring and
signatory parties, except the ACHP, to this agreement via the
party’s preferred form of communication and no further
assessment shall occur.
2. Should the Army and SHPO concur that the WRLRA Reuse Plan
has adverse effects on historic properties, the Army may place
additional stipulations in the transfer documents to ensure adverse
effects are avoided, minimized or mitigated. Any additional
stipulations shall be developed in consultation with the SHPO and
all concurring and signatory parties.
3. If agreement cannot be reached, Army shall comply with
procedures for dispute resolution per Stipulation XIV.
V.

Removal of Non-Character-Defining Features
Prior to historic property transfer, the Army, in consultation with the SHPO,
shall ensure adherence to the Standards (Attachment D) in the removal of noncharacter-defining features associated with historic properties as noted in
Attachment C. The Army shall take all precautions not to damage historic
fabric and shall repair surfaces to ensure preservation of historic materials.
Non-character-defining features may consist of, but are not limited to,
artwork, plaques, memorials, building numbers, architectural lettering, time
capsules and architectural signage.

VI.

Photographic Documentation
Within nine (9) months of execution of this PA, the Army shall take a
minimum of seventy (70) and a maximum one hundred (100) large-format
black-and-white general landscape views of the installation. Photographs
(negative and prints) shall meet the National Park Service’s “Heritage
Documentation Programs HABS/HAER/HALS Photography Standards” dated
November 2011. Three sets of labeled archival contact prints shall be
produced. Negatives and one (1) set of prints shall be offered to the Library of
Congress within three (3) months of the views being taken. The remainder
shall be distributed to the SHPO and the Walter Reed Society within six (6)
months of the view being taken. High resolution digital scans shall be made
available to all parties to this agreement upon request.
9

VII.

WRAMC Interpretive Materials
Within nine (9) months of execution of this PA, the Army shall initiate the
development and implementation of a self-guided walking tour with
interpretive panels meeting the quality standards of the DC Heritage Trails
program for portions of WRAMC that will be accessible to the public after
transfer from Army control. The Army shall fund the design, production and
installation of all interpretive materials. The Army shall complete the
development and implementation of a self-guided walking tour within four (4)
years of execution of this PA.

VIII. WRAMC Existing Conditions Document
Based upon the Architectural Inventory of Historic Properties Present at
WRAMC (Attachment C), the Army shall perform existing conditions
photography of each principal façade of each eligible building and select
copies (floor plans, facades, roof plans, details of character-defining features)
of as-built drawings. All photographs shall meet National Register Bulletin
39: How to Improve the Quality of Photographs for National Register
Nomination Bulletin. A separate report shall be generated for each historic
building. The Army shall provide the existing conditions document to the
recipient of any historic property at transfer. The existing conditions
document shall be completed within nine (9) months of the execution of this
PA.
IX.

Website
The Army shall maintain a publically accessible website for the duration of
this PA at http://www.hqda.army.mil/acsim/brac/nhpa_wramc.html
or at another location after notification of all concurring and signatory parties
to this agreement and the public. The website shall contain electronic versions
of relevant Section 106 consultation documents and information on how to
obtain all mitigation stipulated in this PA.

X.

Environmental Remediation
In the event that environmental remediation is required prior to transfer, and if
historic properties may be affected, the Army shall, to the extent practicable,
solicit input from the SHPO and consulting parties during the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA)
decision making process and not under the NHPA or this PA. Through the
CERCLA process, the Army shall take remediation actions necessary to
assure protection of human health and the environment and, when possible,
implement measures to avoid, minimize or mitigate adverse effects on historic
properties.
10

XI. Post Review Discoveries
A. Non-Native Human Remains and NAGPRA-Related Discoveries.
Discovery of human remains shall invoke the following procedure:
1. Within twenty-four (24) hours, the Army shall implement measures to
protect the human remains from inclement weather and vandalism, and
shall notify the District Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
(OCME) and the SHPO of the discovery. Sufficient description of the
discovery shall be provided to allow OCME to complete its obligations
under D.C. Code § 5-1406 or other applicable law(s).
2. If the OCME determines that the human remains are not subject to a
criminal investigation by local or federal authorities, the Army shall
determine appropriate disposition in consultation with the SHPO. The
Army shall comply with all applicable federal laws and regulations.
3. The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (25
U.S.C. § 3001 et seq), 43 C.F.R. Part 10 shall apply if human remains
and any associated or unassociated funerary objects, sacred objects or
objects of cultural patrimony are identified as Native American if such
are encountered before the transfer of any parcel out of federal control,
B. Unanticipated Discoveries. In the event of post-review discovery of
historic properties prior to transfer of any parcel out of federal control, work
shall immediately stop in the area of discovery and the Army shall comply
with 36 C.F.R. § 800.13(b)(3). The SHPO shall be notified immediately and
identification and evaluation of the resource shall be undertaken by the Army
in consultation with the SHPO.
XII. Anti-Deficiency Act
The Army’s obligations under this PA are subject to the availability of
appropriated funds, and the stipulations of this PA are subject to the provisions
of the Anti-Deficiency Act. The Army will make reasonable and good faith
efforts to secure the necessary funds to implement this PA in its entirety. If
compliance with the Anti-Deficiency Act alters or impairs the Army’s ability to
implement the stipulations of this PA, the Army will consult in accordance with
the amendment and terminations procedures found at Stipulations XVI and
XVII of this PA.

11

XIII. Status Reports
Until all parcels and historic properties at WRAMC have been transferred from
Army control in accordance with the terms of this PA, the Army will provide a
status report to the SHPO to review implementation of the terms of this PA one
year after the execution of this PA and annually every year following. The
report shall also be made available via the Army’s BRAC website at
www.hqda.army.mil/acsim/brac/nhpa_wramc.html. Status reports shall include,
at a minimum: a list of every parcel remaining not transferred, the current
condition of each building on each parcel, and a description of any changes to
the building’s condition that have occurred over the reporting period, including
actions taken by the Army to complete the actions outlined in Stipulations I, II,
III, IV, V, VI, VII, IX, X, and XI. This information may be submitted in tabular
format. Alternatively, an annual meeting may occur to review implementation
of the terms of this PA and to determine whether amendments are needed, and
will serve in lieu of an annual report if requested by the Army or the SHPO.
XIV. Dispute Resolution
Should any signatory party to this agreement object at any time to any actions
proposed or the manner in which the terms of this PA are implemented, the
Army shall consult with such signatory party to resolve the objection. If the
Army determines that such objection cannot be resolved, the Army will:
A. Forward all documentation relevant to the dispute, including the Army’s
proposed resolution, to the ACHP. The documentation shall also be made
available via the Army’s BRAC website (Stipulation IX). The ACHP shall
provide the Army with its advice on the resolution of the objection within thirty
(30) calendar days of receiving adequate documentation. Prior to reaching a
final decision on the dispute, the Army shall prepare a written response that
takes into account any timely recommendations or comments regarding the
dispute from the ACHP, signatories and concurring parties, and provide them
with a copy of this written response. The Army will then proceed according to
its final decision.
B. If the ACHP does not provide its recommendation regarding the dispute
within the thirty (30) calendar-day time period, the Army may make a final
decision on the dispute and proceed accordingly. Prior to reaching such a final
decision, the Army shall prepare a written response that takes into account any
timely comments regarding the dispute from the signatories and concurring
parties to the PA, and provide that decision, in writing, to all concurring and
signatory parties to this agreement.
C. The Army's responsibility to carry out all other actions subject to the terms of
this PA that are not the subject of the dispute remain unchanged.

12

XV. Consulting Parties Roles and Responsibilities
A. Consulting Parties. Consulting parties are defined as all parties that have
participated in this agreement. Consulting parties that do not sign the
agreement shall have no further active role in the execution of this agreement
after it is signed.
B. Concurring Parties. Concurring parties are defined as those parties that have
participated in this agreement and have signed the agreement as a concurring
party. Concurring parties shall be involved in the execution of this agreement
as stipulated herein.
C. Signatory Parties. Signatory parties shall have active roles and specific
responsibilities for the execution of the stipulation of this agreement as
stipulated herein.
XVI. Amendments
This PA shall be amended when such an amendment is agreed to in writing by
all signatory parties. The amendment will be effective on the date a copy signed
by all of the signatory parties is filed with the ACHP.
XVII. Termination of Agreement
If any signatory party to this PA determines that its terms will not or cannot be
carried out, that party shall immediately consult with the other signatory parties
to attempt to develop an amendment per Stipulation XVI, above. If within thirty
(30) calendar days (or another time period agreed to by all signatory parties) an
amendment cannot be reached, any signatory party may terminate the agreement
upon written notification to the other signatory parties.
Once the PA is terminated, and prior to work continuing on the undertaking, the
Army must either (a) execute an Memorandum of Agreement pursuant to 36
C.F.R. § 800.6, or (b) request, take into account, and respond to the comments
of the ACHP under 36 C.F.R. § 800.7. The Army shall notify all signatory and
concurring parties as to the course of action it will pursue.
XVIII. Duration
The effective date of this PA shall be the date of the last signature of a signatory
party. This PA shall terminate upon the disposal of the last parcel at WRAMC
or ten (10) years, whichever is first occurring.

13

EXECUTION of this PA by the Army, SHPO, and ACHP and implementation of its
terms evidence that the Army has taken into account the effects of this undertaking on
historic properties and afforded the ACHP an opportunity to comment.

14

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of the Army,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office, and the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Closure and Transfer of Select Parcels of
Waiter Reed Army Medical Center
Washington, District of Columbia

Signatory Party:

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICE

Date:
Mr. David Malone ,State Historic Preservation Officer

17

III)/ v0 12
r

I

AMENDMENT TO
Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of the Army,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office, and the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Closure and Transfer of Select Parcels of
Walter Reed Army Medical Center
Washington, District of Columbia (AGREEMENT)

WHEREAS, the Agreement was executed on January 24, 2013;
WHEREAS, the Carl Levin and Howard P. “Buck” McKeon National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2015 allows the Secretary of the Army to convey a parcel of real property at
former Walter Reed Army Medical Center (WRAMC) as shown in revised Attachment B,
consisting of approximately 11.85 acres and containing Building 3 (attached parking structure),
Building 52 (warehouse and outpatient clinic), Building 53 (former post theater), and Building 54
(The Armed Forces Institute of Pathology Building and former Military Medical Museum) for
the purpose of permitting the recipient to use the parcel for the protection of public health,
including research; and
WHEREAS, conveyance of the aforementioned public health parcel would be categorized as a
public benefit conveyance which is already identified as part of the original undertaking; and
WHEREAS, this creates an additional designated portion of the installation in a transfer for a
public benefit conveyance; and
NOW THEREFORE, in accordance with Stipulation XVI of the Agreement, the Army, the
SHPO, and the ACHP agree to amend the Agreement as follows:

1.

The graphic in Attachment B of the Agreement showing the conveyance of property
parcels is revised as attached.

AMENDMENT TO
Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of the Army,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office, and the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Closure and Transfer of Select Parcels of
Walter Reed Army Medical Center
Washington, District of Columbia

Signatory Party:

DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
O'DONNELL.WILLIAM.
J.II.1180145105
___________________________________
Digitally signed by
O'DONNELL.WILLIAM.J.II.1180145105
DN: c=US, o=U.S. Government, ou=DoD, ou=PKI,
ou=USA, cn=O'DONNELL.WILLIAM.J.II.1180145105
Date: 2015.11.25 11:23:34 -05'00'

25 November 2015
Date: ________________

William J. O'Donnell, II
Chief, Operational Army, Medical, Industrial and Reserve Branch
Department of the Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Installation Management

Public
Health
11.85 Acres

31.69 Acres

66.59 Acres

Attachment B. Disposition of WRAMC Property and Area of Potential Effect.

Appendix B

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

CONTENTS
Introduction...................................................................................................... 1
Exhibit 1 - Summary of Substantive Comments........................................... 5
Federal Agencies.................................................................................................5
District Agencies.................................................................................................7
Public..................................................................................................................7

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments.......................................... 9
DC-LRA..............................................................................................................9
EO 13693............................................................................................................9
Excavation...........................................................................................................9
Greenhouse Gases...............................................................................................9
Groundwater.......................................................................................................9
Hazardous Materials...........................................................................................9

Building 40.............................................................................................9
Bunker.....................................................................................................9
Disposal Areas........................................................................................9
PCBs.....................................................................................................10
Removal................................................................................................10
Tanks.....................................................................................................10
Historic Preservation.........................................................................................10
Hospital.............................................................................................................10
Noise.................................................................................................................10
Parking..............................................................................................................10
Pest/Animal Control.........................................................................................11
Public Access....................................................................................................11
Stormwater........................................................................................................12

Page iii

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Traffic................................................................................................................12

14th Street.............................................................................................13
16th Street.............................................................................................13
Air Quality............................................................................................13
Controls.................................................................................................13
DC-LRA................................................................................................13
Design...................................................................................................13
DOS Role..............................................................................................14
Heavy Vehicles......................................................................................14
ICC........................................................................................................14
Other Developments.............................................................................14
Transportation Network....................................................................................14
Vegetation.........................................................................................................14

Index................................................................................................................ 15

Page iv

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

INTRODUCTION
Under the CEQ’s regulations implementing NEPA (40 CFR Part 1503.1), an agency that publishes
an EIS is required to:
◊

Obtain the comments of Federal agencies with jurisdiction by law or special expertise, and

◊

Request comments from:
•

Agencies at all levels of government authorized to develop and enforce environmental
standards;

•

Indian tribes, when the effects may be on a reservation;

•

An agency that has requested EISs on actions of the kind proposed; and

•

The public, including actively soliciting comments from those persons or
organizations that may be interested or affected.

Comments received can range from statements of support for, or opposition to, an agency’s
proposed action to detailed critiques of the EIS’s analyses and suggestions for new alternatives.
Comments might identify factual errors, omissions, areas of controversy, and provide new
information to be considered in the analysis of alternatives and prior to decision-making.
An agency’s focus in preparing the FEIS is the consideration of and responses to these comments.
The comment-response process includes all steps from receipt and consideration of comments
through the preparation of responses and any needed revisions to the EIS. An agency cannot
complete the NEPA process until it has considered and responded to substantive comments on
the DEIS or SDEIS in the FEIS. The comment-response process is intended to help make better
and more informed decisions.
On March 24, March 30, April 11, April 18, and May 12, 2017, DOS sent emails to the project
mailing list (562 subscribers and 53 agency recipients), advising them of the status of the study,
the circulation of the SDEIS, opportunities to pose questions to DOS and receive answers, and
provide comments.
The DOS announced the availability of the FMC at the Former WRAMC SDEIS on April 6, 2014
(Federal Register, Vol. 82, No. 65). A 45-day comment period immediately followed, during
which DOS invited Federal, District and local agencies, organizations, and individuals to submit
comments on the DEIS. The DOS received five comment letters, 16 comment cards, and three
comment e-mails.
An open house and a public hearing were held during the 45-day comment period. The purpose
of the open house was to: 1) meet with people with an interest in the study to answer questions
about the study, and 2) receive suggestions for further avoidance and minimization of potential

Page 1

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

impacts from the action alternative and ways to improve the analysis of alternatives prior to
decision-making. The Open House and Public Hearing were held on April 20, 2017 at the Red
Cross Building #41, Dahlia Street NW, Washington, DC and a transcript of the hearing was
prepared (Attachment). Six attendees offered substantive comments during the public hearing.
The purpose of the public hearing was for the public to offer comments on the SDEIS prior to
preparation of the FEIS and decision-making; the public hearing was not a question and answer
session.
The public comment period on the FMC at the Former WRAMC SDEIS closed on May 18, 2017.
The requirements for responding to comments received on EISs are contained in 40 CFR 1503.4.
When identifying substantive comments, DOS closely examined each letter, card and email
and took a conservative approach to identifying substantive comments; if a remark appeared to
suggest modifying an alternative, developing and evaluating a new alternative, improving or
modifying the analysis, or making factual corrections, it was identified as a substantive comment.
Individual comments are identified in Exhibit 1 and each was assigned a unique comment number.
Due to the number and similarity of some comments, similar comments were grouped together,
categorized and responded to collectively in Exhibit 2. Keyword references in Exhibit 1 refer
to the category of the response in Exhibit 2. Exhibit 2 was arranged alphabetically by keyword
category.

Page 2

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

What is a Substantive Comment?
A substantive comment is one which suggests the modifications of an alternative; suggests the
development and evaluation of an alternative not previously considered; supplements, improves or
modifies analyses; or corrects a factual error.
40 CFR 1503.4: Response to Comments
A. An agency preparing a final environmental impact statement shall assess and consider comments
both individually and collectively, and shall respond by one or more of the means listed below,
stating its response in the final statement. Possible responses are to:
1. Modify alternatives including the proposed action.
2. Develop and evaluate alternatives not previously given serious consideration by the agency.
3. Supplement, improve, or modify its analyses.
4. Make factual corrections.
5. Explain why the comments do not warrant further agency response, citing the sources,
authorities, or reasons which support the agency’s position and, if appropriate, indicate those
circumstances which would trigger agency reappraisal or further response.
B. All substantive comments received on the draft statement (or summaries thereof where the response
has been exceptionally voluminous), should be attached to the final statement whether or not the
comment is thought to merit individual discussion by the agency in the text of the statement.
C. If changes in response to comments are minor and are confined to the responses described in
paragraphs (a)(4) and (5) of this section, agencies may write them on errata sheets and attach
them to the statement instead of rewriting the draft statement. In such cases only the comments,
the responses, and the changes and not the final statement need be circulated (Sec. 1502.19). The
entire document with a new cover sheet shall be filed as the final statement.

Page 3

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page 4

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1 - Summary of Substantive Comments
Received From

#

Comments

Federal Agencies
U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency

1-1

...the time frame for the construction of DC-LRA, anticipates a 15-to 20-year time frame. Phase
l is to occur from 2014-2017, therefore Phase 1 would be concluding shortly. Please address
if the DC-LRA on track with this timeline. It would be helpful to describe the corresponding
timelines of the two projects so that cumulative effects of these projects on communities in
the area can be minimized. See DC-LRA

1-2

Please consider the Heat Island Effect and the potential for increased impervious surface to
influence conditions in the Final SEIS. See EO13693

1-3

On page 130, Section 3.13.2, EPA recommends details on post-excavation activity be included,
such as using certified clean fill as backfill. This would reduce the direct contact pathway.
Please clarify post-excavation efforts. See Excavation

1-4

It would be relevant to indicate if the 2012 targets, as mentioned in the DEIS, have been met.
Please explain what progress has been made and, if there has been less progress than was
planned for, how this effects the 2020 targets. See Greenhouse Gases

1-5

EPA recommends that the DOS disclose any water quality data or restrictions on groundwater
on the site, if applicable. EPA recommends more complete assessment of current water
quality conditions at the project site, particularly in relation to planned activities including
environmental remediation or any restrictions or contingencies that should be considered on
construction. See Groundwater

1-6

Page 133, Section 3.13.3, Hazardous Wastes, states that the hazardous waste storage bunker
was recommended for closeout, but the only exceedance was for cadmium. It would be
clarifying to explain what parameters were tested for during closure, to assure that analysis
was done for a range of parameters, as there were a number of compounds stored at the bunker.
See Hazardous Materials - Bunker

1-7

Page 136; Section 3.13.7, Disposal Areas: EPA recommends aerial photo interpretation of the
IAS/P A to assist in identifying any potential disposal areas. Please describe contingencies
that would be considered such as sampling during site preparation, if a potential disposal
area is identified (by photo interpretation or during demolition or site clearing). A range
of wastes have been present on site including radiological, paints, asbestos and solvents.
See Hazardous Materials - Disposal Areas

1-8

Page xxv states, "If a building will be reused, the foreign mission would be responsible for
[PCB-impacted soil] removal. If a building is to be demolished, DOS would be responsible
for removal." We recommend that additional details be considered for the Final SEIS, Record
of Decision, or other documentation prepared for the transfer of property and environmental
clean­up. This could include explanation of how these efforts will be supervised, enforced,
and monitored. To the extent possible, please explain what agencies will be involved in
evaluation of environmental conditions, a remedy design, hauling, disposal and oversight.
See Hazardous Materials - PCBs

1-9

In Exhibit 3.42, Petroleum Tanks and Hazardous Substances on page 130, the categories of
color codes are general. All of Building 40 is considered to be PCB contaminated based on
this exhibit. Please clarify the contamination locations. It is suggested that close-ups or insets
be used to show the specific areas of contamination. Please address soil, concrete, and sump
water. The designated footprint of the contamination may be reduced by being more specific
in the location of contamination. See Hazardous Materials - Building 40

1-10

Page 132 describes wipe sampling conducted yielded 10,000 to 15,000 ug/100 cm2. It is
recommended this value be shown in ppb, or a more easily comparable unit of measurement
throughout. Furthermore, a core sample of the concrete in stained/unstained area, which is
representative of the concrete vault, might be more representative of PCB levels. Please explain
the decision to use a wipe versus core sample. See Hazardous Materials - PCBs

Barbara Rudnick,
NEPA Team Leader, Office
of Environmental Programs

Continued on Following Page

Page 5

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Exhibit 1 - Summary of Substantive Comments (Continued)
Received From

U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency

#

Comments

1-11

Although we appreciate that the PCB section has been expanded upon in the SDEIS, it is
recommended that the site be remediated past the "low occupancy areas" designation made by
the Department of the Army (between 10 and 25 ppb ). Even if PCB concentrations in these areas
"appear to be too high for unrestricted use," it is recommended that DOS remediate as close to
the unrestricted use concentrations (0-1 ppm) as possible. See Hazardous Materials - PCBs

1-12

Section 3.8 does not appear to mention potential noise impacts from construction, but this
factor could have a significant community impact. It should be clearly stated that specific
construction activities will be confined to certain times of day to minimize community disruption.
Noise

1-13

Page xxiv states, "The Preferred Action Alternative would result in the removal of the storage
tanks and decommissioning of the generators." More information on best management practices
(BMPs) for this process, anticipated parties responsible for the work, and any conditions that
may be placed on land transfer documentation, would be beneficial in order to ensure the
removal is thoroughly planned and will be carefully executed. See Hazardous Materials - Tanks

1-14

The SDEIS explains DC's efforts to replace portions of the combined sewer with separate storm
sewers. It would be helpful to provide an update on progress since 2009 and its influence on
FMC planning. See Stormwater

1-15

Please clarify how DOS determined predevelopment hydrology conditions to achieve this
stormwater goal. It would be helpful to estimate SWM needs per parcel to determine if LID
and traditional designs will fulfill goals. See Stormwater

1-16

It is recommended that the SFEIS include impervious surface estimates that will result from
the proposed action. See Stormwater

1-17

In comments on the DEIS (comment 3-24 and 3-32) EPA asks for assessments to evaluate
conditions under the scenario of full occupancy. The reasoning for this information is to better
understand and interpret traffic, parking, and road capacity on the FMC site, which could
have broader impacts on the surrounding communities. EPA requests quantification of full
occupancy for full operation years of WRAMC, and estimated/anticipated occupancy of FMC
and DC-LRA. See Traffic

1-18

Page 56 states, "Based on this mode share, the total number of trips generated by the ICC
was calculated to be approximately 747 inbound and 121 outbound (868 total) during the
morning peak hour and 100 inbound and 630 outbound (730 total) during the afternoon peak
hour, without transit use." These numbers are significantly higher than what was presented in
the DEIS. Total vehicular trips almost doubled between DEIS and SDEIS estimates. Please
explain briefly. See Traffic - ICC

1-19

The approximate 1,916 and 2,197 trips mentioned in the text that the DC-LRA would generate
do not correspond to the numbers in Exhibit 3.5, they are slightly different (1,918 and 2,198
respectively). See Traffic - DC-LRA

1-20

Please explain the resource implications (natural and community) for the cul-de-sac option
vs. the through-street option (Page 27, Section 2.3.2, Alternative 7: SDEIS Preferred Action
Alternative). See Traffic - 14th Street

1-21

Please address whether or not the through-street option will impact the viewshed DOS wants
to preserve and how much of the historic fencing will need to be removed for the through
street option. DOS should clarify the potential community impacts of the through-street option.
See Traffic - 14th Street

1-22

Page 76 in the DEIS mentions that a draft maintenance plan was submitted in October 2012
for the District of Columbia-MD-VA 1997 fine particulate (PM2.s) nonattainment area, which
includes mobile vehicle emission budgets for the interim year of 2017 and the out years of
2025. Please state the status of the maintenance plan and why is it not included in the SD EIS.
Section 3.7.3 Hot Spot Analysis in DEIS is also omitted in SDEIS. See Traffic - Air Quality

Barbara Rudnick,
NEPA Team Leader, Office
of Environmental Programs

Continued on Following Page

Page 6

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 1 - Summary of Substantive Comments (Continued)
Received From

#

Comments

1-23

As DOS is responsible for ensuring that the transportation needs within the FMC property
are met, we recommend the oversight role of DOS be included in the DOS design guidance.
See Traffic - DOS Role

1-24

The DEIS mentions the Walmart on Georgia Ave, Beacon Center, Takoma Central, and
Takoma Park. Please indicate if the projects were excluded from the SDEIS because they are
already completed. Given this information, please clarify why the approximate number of trips
generated is roughly the same. It is recommended that development projects in the study area
be depicted on a map to show their proximity to the Proposed Action. Please address other
environmental and community influences of the construction of the additional facilities in the
WRAMC area. See Traffic - Other Developments

1-25

...The extension of the Georgia Avenue to Buzzard Point Streetcar Line (Phase 2) further north
to Takoma would extend streetcar service further north along Georgia Avenue and connect to
the Takoma Metrorail Station. It is expected to be completed by 2018 (DDOT, 2010)." Please
provide a more recent update on the progress of this project and how the progress of this project
could influence access and transportation planning for FMC. See Transportation Network

1-26

Please include the FMC design guidelines that will supplement the lease agreement as an
Appendix to the SFEIS. It is recommended that the lease agreement should hold each chancery
accountable for preserving healthy historical and special trees in compliance with the Urban
Forest Preservation Act of 2002, and also ensure that hazardous trees are removed if necessary.
See Vegetation

2-1

Consider allowing daytime on-street parking on internal roadways if the chanceries are expected
to receive visitors for consular or visa services throughout the day. See Parking

2-2

In the Final Environmental Impact Statement, consider use of internal laneways spurring east
and west from 14th Street (between Main Drive and Dahlia Street) along the rear of the proposed
lots for vehicular access. This will reduce the number of curb cuts along internal roadways
which degrade the walking experience throughout the campus while reducing opportunities
for impacts between turning vehicles and pedestrians/cyclists. See enclosed modified Exhibit
S2 (page vii from the SDEIS). See Traffic - Design

Edmund E. Atkins

3-1

It seems to us that at least 80-90% of parking for chanceries should be below-grade. See Parking

Edmund E. Atkins

4-1

It seems to us that, at least, 80 to 90 percent of parking for chanceries should be below grade.
See Parking

Gale Black

5-1

I do have concerns regard the PCB impacted soils, the removal of the radioactive materials that
may be there and the removal of the asbestos. See Hazardous Materials - Removal

Karrye Braxton

6-1

Which gates will be used for constructions trucks? Will Fern Street and Aspen Street be
avoided? And as a corollary to that, which time period are we talking about trucks coming in
and out of the site? See Traffic - Heavy Vehicles

6-2

How will you coordinate with the master developer and the Children’s Medical Center to
assure that vermin, that is rats, mice, foxes, deer, racoons -- leave anything out -- et cetera, are
controlled? See Pest/Animal Control

Monica Goletani

7-1

Historic walking trail would be nice, Brightwood already has one. See Historic Preservation

Joseph Hairston

8-1

… some of us want to use 14th Street, and I think there is a solution to it. Close the gate from
6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. See Traffic - Controls

Wendell Joice

9-1

... a missing key item for construction impact: Pest Control. Excavation/Demolition is likely
to create rats running into surrounding neighborhood. In many areas, approved pest control
programs must be in place prior to excavation/demolition. See Pest/Animal Control

U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency

Barbara Rudnick,
NEPA Team Leader, Office
of Environmental Programs

District Agencies
District of Columbia
Office of Planning
Eric D. Shaw, Director

Public

Continued on Following Page

Page 7

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Exhibit 1 - Summary of Substantive Comments (Continued)
Received From

#

Comments

Wendell Joice

10-1

The environmental impact statement seems pretty good and comprehensive except that the
construction impact does not address rodent control (standard practice for demolition/excavation
construction and legally required in jurisdictions such as DC, Baltimore, Chicago, Boston, etc.).
See Pest/Animal Control

Alexander Lofft

11-1

Consider moving /clustering single family homes (that are in good enough condition) to
recreate a DC residential street to further integrate site into surrounding neighborhood.
See Historic Preservation

11-2

If the houses are preservable, can they be clustered in a residential block of 1/6 acre sites?
See Historic Preservation

11-3

Permanently open[ing] the gates along 16th and Alaska Ave to allow pass-through pedestrian/
cycle/vehicle traffic. See Public Access

Christine Martin

12-1

What measures will be put in place to deal with the inevitable rats that will be displaced during
construction to keep them from infesting the neighboring housing? See Pest/Animal Control

Loretta Newman

13-1

I do have concerns on historic preservation, and that making sure that saving, ... that the
historic buildings are saved. And there are some that are contributing buildings, but they’re
not, apparently, going to be saved. I’m very concerned. The old houses, you know the ones
I mean, the bungalows. See Historic Preservation

Rashan

14-1

I understand the current plan for an under ground parking garage for the FMC but what other
parking plans are in place for the LRA -- to address parking overflow into the neighborhood.
See Parking

14-2

What will be the plan to reduce vehicular traffic within the residential neighborhood (Shepherd
Park). See Traffic

15-1

Build a left turn lane from s-bound 16th St to turn onto Alaska Ave NW and permit left turns
here (currently prohibited). See Traffic - 16th Street

15-2

Place a No Left Turn 6:30-9:30am sign at the left turn lane from s-bound 16th St to Floral St NW
See Traffic - Controls

15-3

Place a do not enter 3:00-6:30pm sign at 14th St and Alaska Ave NW (if 14th is still open).
See Traffic - Controls

Angela Schmidt

16-1

... if Dahlia Street is open, ... currently, you cannot turn left from southbound 16th onto Alaska.
I would propose that they make a left turn lane there and allow left turns from 16th onto Alaska
so that people won’t be tempted to use my street as a cut through. See Traffic - 16th Street

Russell A. Smith

17-1

Kill the rats during construction See Pest/Animal Control

Russell A. Smith

18-1

Kill the rats during construction See Pest/Animal Control

James Walker

19-1

The city needs a hospital and a med school. Two things that could be done here. Open Walter
Reed back up as a hospital. See Hospital

Angela Schmidt

Page 8

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments
Comment
#

Comment Category

Response to Substantive Comment

1-1

DC-LRA

DOS and DC-LRA meet on approximately a monthly basis to coordinate a variety
of issues including, but not limited to, potential interim uses of the DOS portion
of the site, development timeframe, development guidelines, and neighborhood
impacts. Implementation of Phase 1 of the DC-LRA project is underway. However,
the proposed timeframe will be influenced by the success of the District's marketing
efforts, regional economic conditions, capital market conditions, other proximate
development, and the potential for unexpected environmental remediation.

1-2

EO 13693

Overall, impervious parking areas within the FMC would be reduced due to the
eventual removal of surface parking lots during redevelopment.

1-3

Excavation

Documentation of laboratory analysis of soils used to backfill the excavated area
around the vaults at the northwest corner of Building 40 (tested) and the areas
around the transformer pads in the Building 40 courtyard (unknown if tested) were
not provided by the Department of the Army (DOA) and it was assumed they met
the cleanup level of less than or equal to 25 mg/kg.

1-4

Greenhouse Gases

Section 3.18.2.4 has been revised to state that: The District of Columbia completed an
updated Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emissions inventory in 2013 for the calendar years
2012-2013. GHG emissions in the District of Columbia fell 23.3 percent from 10.10
million metric tons of carbon in 2006 to 7.75 million tons in 2013. Emissions fell
despite significant increases in population and employment in the District during this
period. As a result, per capita emissions dropped 30.8 percent since 2006. Emissions
rose slightly (2.3 percent) from 2012 to 2013 due in part to colder weather driving
greater building energy use for heating. As of 2013, the District surpassed its interim
goal of reducing emissions 20 percent by 2015 (DDOE 2013).

1-5

Groundwater

Exhibit 3.46 has been updated to provide 2013 emissions data.
Section 3.2.2 has been revised to state that: U.S. Army Public Health Command
reported the results of groundwater sampling from monitoring wells in the vicinity
of the transformer vaults at the northwest corner of Building 40 and estimated the
concentrations of PCBs (concentrations less than the reporting limit of 0.5 microgram
per liter (μg/L)) in some samples. The estimated results may be false positives as
they were not confirmed through use of a second column in a gas chromatograph.
No other groundwater sampling has taken place on the property.
The need for further groundwater sampling will be determined by the DOS.
1-9

Hazardous Materials Building 40

The contaminated area was the concrete floor in room B003 in the basement of
Building 40 and a release to soil did not occur. The building could not be accessed
due to its condition to identify the exact location of this room. The exhibit was
revised to indicate a smaller area. According to the Army, the Building 40 sump is
not located in this area.

1-6

Hazardous Materials Bunker

The DOA reported that they could not find the 1991 sampling and 1992 follow-up
sampling for chemical compounds, and no documentation was available concerning
regulatory agency involvement in the remediation activities. The DOA's radiological
closure report indicated the bunkers met the requirements for unrestricted use.

1-7

Hazardous Materials Disposal Areas

DOS does not believe aerial photo interpretation is warranted as information
concerning the historical use of the property is readily available. Federal and District
regulations will be followed if a potential disposal area is identified.

Continued on Following Page

Page 9

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments (Continued)
Comment
#
1-8, 1-10,
1-11

Comment Category
Hazardous Materials PCBs

Response to Substantive Comment
DOS will meet regulatory requirements for PCB remediation and may remediate
beyond requirements to the unrestricted use concentration, depending on the planned
use of the area.
DOS will demolish non-usable buildings to provide foreign missions with pad-ready
sites, in accordance with federal regulations governing hazardous waste remediation.
DOS will include language in property transfer documents describing the supervision
and monitoring of clean-up activities.
Prior to the transfer of property from the DOA to the Department of State, the DOA
chose to perform wipe samples and performed the cleanup in accordance with their
evaluation. Wipe sample results are commonly expressed as ug/100 cm; therefore,
no change was made to the units.

5-1

Hazardous Materials Removal

PCB impacted areas and asbestos would be remediated in accordance with applicable
regulations.
The DOA's reports indicate all areas of the property were cleared to unrestricted use
levels with regard to radioactive materials.

1-13

Hazardous Materials Tanks

One UST, MP-30, may remain on the property; DOS will be responsible for removal
of UST MP-30 if it remains on the property. Four ASTs ranging from 84 to 200
gallons and three generators decommissioned by the DOA remain on the property.
If a building is reused, the foreign mission would be responsible for removal of the
ASTs and decommissioning of the generators; if a building is to be demolished,
DOS would be responsible for removal and decommissioning. Through the design
guidelines, DOS would ensure that remediation is carried out in accordance with
District and federal law.

7-1, 11-1,
11-2, 13-1

Historic Preservation

The streets and sidewalks of the Foreign Missions Center will be open to the public.
As part of the master planning process all of the existing buildings were evaluated
for potential reuse as part of the Foreign Missions Center. Of the buildngs on the
FMC site that have been identifed as contributing resources to the historic district
only building 40 (Walter Reed Army Institute of Research) and building 41 (Red
Cross Building) were identifed as having the potential for reuse by a foreign mission.
Both buildings are being offered for potential reuse and will be retained if a partner
can be identified. The Memorial Chapel (building 57) will be retained and operated
by the Department of State. The residential properties on the west side of the site
are in poor condition and are not efficiently adaptable for use by a foreign mission.
These structures will be demolished and the land leased for new construction by
foreign missions.

19-1

Hospital

The hospital facilities at Walter Reed, which are not part of the DOS portion of the
campus, are antiquated. So much so, that the Army has relocated these functions to
a new facility in Bethesda, MD.

1-12

Noise

Section 3.15 Construction Impacts has been revised to state that the "construction
schedule would adhere to the District's noise regulations setting legal construction
hours from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday through Saturday."

Parking

This EIS is intended to address the parking demands of the FMC portion of the
former WRAMC campus and does not seek to address parking demands associated
with the LRA portion of the former WRAMC campus.

2-1, 3-1,
4-1, 14-1

On-street parking would not be permitted on FMC roadways. All chanceries are
required to acccomodate their visitor parking needs through their transportation
demand management (TDM) plan. The majority of parking would be provided in
below-grade lots.

Continued on Following Page

Page 10

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments (Continued)
Comment
#
6-2, 9-1,
10-1, 12-1,
17-1, 18-1

1-13

Comment Category

Response to Substantive Comment

Pest/Animal Control

Section 3.15 has been revised to state that: When a building demolition occurs
on the Foreign Missions Center, the DOS would hire a pest control contractor. In
addition, DOS would coordinate with the developers for the land owned by Children’s
National Medical Center and the Parks at Walter Reed; if they demolish buildings
or start major construction that would impact pests, DOS would hire a pest control
contractor to deal with pests on the Foreign Missions Center property.

Public Access

The FMC is planned as an open campus. Entrances at 16th Street/Main Drive and
Alaska Avenue/Dahlia Street will be open to pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
access. The entrance at Alaska Avenue and 14th Street will be open to pedestrian
and bicycle access.

Continued on Following Page

Page 11

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments (Continued)
Comment
#
1-14, 1-15,
1-16

Comment Category
Stormwater

Response to Substantive Comment
The following language shall be provided within Section 3.2.1 Surface Waters:
"The District's efforts to separate storm drainage from sanitary effluent citywide, as
well as nearby at Rock Creek has been a multi-year effort, which continues. This
process is assisted when partners upstream of impact areas, such as Rock Creek,
redevelop under new DC Stormwater Management Guidelines. Although the FMC
property does not have a combined sewer system, it was built prior to citywide
storm water regulations being in place. Therefore, the property is one of several
hundred, which exacerbates the on-going efforts downstream by having uncontrolled
storm water runoff. This uncontrolled and undetained runoff in cumulative from
all watershed properties, overwhelms downstream infrastructure, overflows, and
becomes combined with sanitary effluent in severe rain events. As a steward and
partner in the District’s efforts to reduce the occurrence of these events, the capture
and retention of storm water runoff within the FMC property is a major component
of the infrastructure upgrades for the project."
The District of Columbia Stormwater Guidebook requires all projects to meet the
following requirements:
1. Water quality volume to be captured and retained onsite for the first flush storm,
a given runoff depth dependent on the type of impervious coverage associated
with the project. For roadways this is 0.5 inch and for non-roadway impervious
surfaces it is 0.3 inch.
2. The 2-year storm event peak discharge shall be controlled to be less than the
pre-development rate.
3. The 15-year storm event peak discharge shall be controlled to be less than the
pre-development rate.
These requirements meet and exceed the requirements of Energy Independence and
Security Act (EISA) Section 438. The project as a whole shall be required to meet
these standards. This will be accomplished in two stages.
The Department of State common parcels (roadways and open spaces) shall establish a predevelopment hydrologic condition for this portion of the property. The DOS infrastructure
upgrades shall include stormwater management to return the post-developed hydrologic
conditions to the pre-developed conditions through the use of several decentralized low
impact development facilities, including bioretention and streetscape filteration inlets,
as well as by reducing the impervious coverage to a minimum required.
The individual chancery parcels shall also be required to meet the DC Stormwater
Management requirements. Each parcel shall have a review of stormwater
management during their construction permitting phase to confirm adequate facilities
have been implemented to reduce the post-developed runoff condition to the predeveloped condition for their parcel.
As individual parcels and the common parcel shall be required to meet the DC
Stormwater Management requirements, the project as a whole shall attain compliance
with the District’s requirements, and therefore the EISA Section 438.

1-17, 14-2

Traffic

The traffic analysis was conducted assuming full buildout and occupancy of both
the FMC and LRA by 2032.
The orientation of FMC access to Alaska Avenue (via Dahlia Street) and 16th Street
(via Main Drive) is planned to orient traffic toward 16th Street and not toward streets
internal to the Shepherd Park neighborhood to the north. However, the traffic analysis
was conducted to assume a conservative condition that accounted for some traffic
from the north that may use 14th Street to access the Dahlia Street gate. Please see
Exhibit 3.11 for planned traffic mitigation measures.

Continued on Following Page

Page 12

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments (Continued)
Comment
#
1-20, 1-21

Response to Substantive Comment

Comment Category
Traffic - 14th Street

DOS has selected the cul-de-sac option as the Selected Action Alternative in the FEIS.
The resource implications of the cul-de-sac vs. through street option are presented
in SDEIS Exhibit 2.4. Section 2.3.2 has been revised to state that the cul-de-sac
option has been selected as a component of the Selected Action Alternative in the
FEIS because it:
1.

Addresses neighborhood concerns about avoiding increased traffic on 14th
Street north of the FMC,

2.

Avoids impact to the contributing historic resource fence and is consistent
with the development history of the WRAMC during the period of historic
significance of interrupting continuity of the urban street grid,

3.

Maximizes funding and schedule feasibility because it would be constructed
and maintained by DOS, not an external partner, and

4.

Maximizes marketability by providing larger lot sizes and creating a
unique condition with strong appeal for members of the foreign mission
community seeking privacy for chanceries.

The primary viewsheds that DOS wants to preserve are not affected by the throughstreet option. Viewsheds of the historic primary entrance of Building 54 are affected.
However, this building is not part of the FMC. For the historic fencing, about 50 to
60 linear feet would need to be removed for the through-street option. The potential
community effects of the through-street option would be a potential increase of traffic
on local streets north of the affected area.
15-1, 16-1

Traffic - 16th Street

This improvement was not contemplated given that it would not result in change to
intersection operations with or without the development of the FMC. Southbound
traffic at the Alaska Avenue/16th Street intersection that wishes to access the FMC
is expected to utilize Main Drive. Also, in order to provide a conservative analysis,
the traffic analysis has also assumed that some FMC traffic from the north would
use 14th Street to Alaska Avenue to access the FMC via Dahlia Street. Finally, the
installation of this turn lane would require the widening of 16th Street, which is
compromised by the location of utilities and steep grades within Rock Creek Park
to the west of 16th Street.

1-22

Traffic - Air Quality

According to the Air Quality Conformity Analysis of the 2016 Constrained Long
Range Plan Amendment and FY2017-2022 Transportation Improvement Program
(http://www1.mwcog.org/clrp/resources/2016/ConformityReportFull.pdf), on
August 24, 2016, EPA published a final rule that resulted in the District of ColumbiaMD-VA region no longer being required to demonstrate transportation conformity
for fine particles standard. As part of the rule, EPA revoked the 1997 fine particles
standard since more stringent 2012 standard had been put in place. The revocation,
combined with the decreasing levels of fine particles in the region always remaining
below the 2012 standard, resulted in the region no longer being required to analyze
fine particles in the air quality conformity determinations.

Traffic - Controls

The implementation of traffic flow restrictions would be determined by DDOT.

Traffic - DC-L RA

The text has been corrected to state that the LRA is expected to generate 1,918 AM
peak hour trips and 2,198 PM peak hour trips.

Traffic - Design

While this may reduce the number of curb cuts, grades located in the area noted on
the exhibit would make these alleyways (or "laneways" as noted) infeasible.

8-1, 15-2,
15-3
1-19
2-2

Continued on Following Page

Page 13

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Exhibit 2 - Responses to Substantive Comments (Continued)
Comment
#

Response to Substantive Comment

Traffic - DOS Role

DOS will serve as the facilitator for the design review submittal, which includes the
Transportation Demand Management plan. Similar to the ICC, DOS will continue
to manage and oversee the FMC campus.

Traffic - Heavy Vehicles

Construction management plans would be developed for the construction of each
chancery. As such, the gates construction traffic may use and time periods that trucks
may come in and out of the site is unknown at this time. However, it is expected that
construction traffic to and from the site is likely to use the Dahlia Street and/or Main
Drive gates (but subject to change). In the vicinity of the site, DDOT designates 16th
Street and Georgia Avenue as truck through routes. South of the site, Aspen Street
is designated by DDOT as restricted to trucks and north of the site, 12th Street is
designated by DDOT as restricted to trucks.

1-18

Traffic - ICC

DDOT requested a more detailed and conservative trip generation than what was
developed in the DEIS. This was primarily due to DDOT's request that the analysis
assume the maximum possible occupancy of the site with the assumption that all
trips to the site would be auto oriented given the maximum amount of parking that
could theoretically be built on the site. As a result, the trip generation requested by
DDOT should be considered extremely conservative for purposes of this analysis. The
statement noted in this specific comment is somewhat out of context in that it refers
to step four of a five step trip generation method that was developed in consultation
with DDOT to determine the conservative number of trips generated by the FMC. This
trip generation method was developed based on existing vehicular counts at the ICC
that were then adjusted as noted in the table below to estimate future trip generation
for the FMC. As a result, the total number of trips estimated to be generated by the
FMC were the maximum amount of development on the FMC were to occur and every
employee/visitor/etc. arrived via a personal car would be 725 AM peak hour trips
(624 inbound/101 outbound) and 609 PM peak hour trips (84 inbound/526 outbound).

1-24

Traffic - Other
Developments

Yes, projects completed prior to 2017 were excluded from the list of present
development. Trips generated from prior constructed projects were included in the
analysis as existing traffic. Development projects are shown in Exhibit 3.44. Please
see Section 3.18 for Construction Impacts.

1-25

Transportation Network

The 2018 completion date has been removed. DDOT currently has no projected
completion date for the streetcar along Georgia Avenue to the Takoma Metrorail
Station. That being said, the traffic analysis of the FMC was prepared based on an
assumption that all employees/visitors/etc. would drive to the campus, at DDOT's
request to provide the most conservative scenario. The streetcar is expected to be a
longterm project that could provide additional connectivity to the site at an unknown
date in the future.

1-26

Vegetation

The design guidelines will be added to the FEIS as an appendix. The design guidelines
require each foreign mission to be in substantial compliance with the DC Urban
Forestry Preservation Act of 2002.

1-23

6-1

Page 14

Comment Category

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

INDEX
A

J

Atkins, Edmund E.
3-1: 7, 10.
4-1: 7, 10.

Joice, Wendell
9-1: 7, 11.
10-1: 8, 11.

B

L

Black, Gale
5-1: 7, 10.

Lofft, Alexander
11-1: 8, 10.
11-2: 8, 10.
11-3: 8.

Braxton, Karrye
6-1: 7, 14.
6-2: 7, 11.

D
DC-LRA: 5, 9.
District of Columbia Office of Planning: 7.
2-1: 7, 10.
2-2: 7, 13.

E
EO 13693: 5, 9.
Excavation: 5, 9.

G
Goletani, Monica
7-1: 7, 10.
Greenhouse Gases: 5, 9.
Groundwater: 5, 9.

H
Hairston, Joseph
8-1: 7, 13.
Hazardous Materials
Building 40: 5, 9.
Bunker: 5, 9.
Disposal Areas: 5, 9.
PCBs: 5, 6, 10.
Removal: 7, 10.
Tanks: 6, 10.
Historic Preservation: 7, 8, 10.
Hospital: 8, 10.

M
Martin, Christine
12-1: 8, 11.

N
Newman, Loretta
13-1: 8, 10.
Noise: 6, 10.

P
Parking: 7, 8, 10.
Pest/Animal Control: 7, 8, 11.
Public Access: 8, 11.

R
Rashan
14-1: 8.
14-2: 8, 12.

S
Schmidt, Angela
15-1: 8, 13.
15-2: 8, 13.
15-3: 8, 13.
16-1: 8, 13.
Smith, Russell A.
17-1: 8, 11.
18-1: 8, 11.
Stormwater: 6, 12.
Substantive Comment: 3.

Page 15

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

T

V

Traffic: 6, 8, 12.
14th Street: 6, 13.
16th Street: 8, 13.
Air Quality: 6, 13.
Controls: 7, 8, 13.
DC-LRA: 6, 13.
Design: 7, 13.
DOS Role: 7, 14.
Heavy Vehicles: 7, 14.
ICC: 6, 14.
Other Developments: 7, 14.

Vegetation: 7, 14.

Transportation Network: 7, 14.

U
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: 5–7.
1-1: 5, 9.
1-2: 5, 9.
1-3: 5, 9.
1-4: 5, 9.
1-5: 5, 9.
1-6: 5, 9.
1-7: 5, 9.
1-8: 5, 10.
1-9: 5, 9.
1-10: 5, 10.
1-11: 6, 10.
1-12: 6, 10.
1-13: 6, 10, 11.
1-14: 6, 12.
1-15: 6, 12.
1-16: 6, 12.
1-17: 6, 12.
1-18: 6, 14.
1-19: 6, 13.
1-20: 6, 13.
1-21: 6, 13.
1-22: 6, 13.
1-23: 7, 14.
1-24: 7, 14.
1-25: 7, 14.
1-26: 7, 14.

Page 16

W
Walker, James
19-1: 8, 10.

Attachment: Comments on the SDEIS

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Page xviii

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

United States Department of the Interior
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

IN REPLY REFER TO:

Office of Environmental Policy and Compliance
Custom House, Room 244
200 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106-2904

May 18, 2017
9043.1
ER 17/0152
Geoffrey Hunt
Department of State A/OPR/RPM
2201 C St. NW, Room 1264
Washington, D.C. 20520-1264
Subject: Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) for the Foreign
Missions Center at the Former Army Walter Reed Medical Center in
Washington, DC.
Dear Mr. Hunt:
The U. S. Department of the Interior (Department) has no comment at this time on the
Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the Foreign Missions Center at the
Former Army Walter Reed Medical Center in Washington, DC.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments.
Sincerely,

Lindy Nelson
Regional Environmental Officer

Page 1

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Page 2

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 3

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

1-1

1-2

1-3

1-4

1-5

Page 4

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

1-6

1-7

1-8

1-9

1-10

1-11

1-12
1-13

Page 5

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

1-13 cont.

1-14

1-15

1-16

1-17

1-18

Page 6

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

1-19

1-20

1-21

1-22

Page 7

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

1-23

1-24

1-25

1-26

Page 8

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 9

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 6:10 PM
To: Ozberk, Erkin (OP); FMC.INFO
Cc: Shaw, Eric (OP); Stern, Tanya (OP); Gabriel, Tracy (OP); Abernathy, Malaika (EOM); Kinlow, Eugene (EOM);
marcel.acosta@ncpc.gov
Subject: Re: DC Office of Planning Comments on DOS Foreign Mission Center SDEIS
Thank you and yours.
Sincerely,
Geoffrey Hunt
U.S. Department of State
Sent from my BlackBerry 10 smartphone.
From: Ozberk, Erkin (OP)
Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 5:59 PM
To: Hunt, Geoffrey A; FMC.INFO
Cc: Shaw, Eric (OP); Stern, Tanya (OP); Gabriel, Tracy (OP); Abernathy, Malaika (EOM); Kinlow, Eugene (EOM);
marcel.acosta@ncpc.gov
Subject: DC Office of Planning Comments on DOS Foreign Mission Center SDEIS
Good Afternoon Mr. Hunt,
Please see the attached comments from the DC Office of Planning on the Foreign Mission Center at the Former Walter
Reed Army Medical Center Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement (SDEIS).
We appreciate the opportunity to comment and look forward to ongoing engagement in the development of the Final
EIS.
All the best,
Erkin

[cid:image002.png@01D0D070.AD5A3870]
Erkin Ozberk, AICP * Ward 4 Neighborhood Planner DC Office of Planning
1100 4th Street SW, Suite E650 * Washington, DC 20024
202.442.7707
erkin.ozberk@dc.gov<mailto:erkin.ozberk@dc.gov>
planning.dc.gov

3

Page 10

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

2-1

Page 11

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

2-1 cont.

2-2

Page 12

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 13

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Email to: Hunt, Geoffrey A HuntGA@state.gov, from Irene Thompson, Project Director at Walter Reed
Children’s National Medical Center
From: Thompson, Irene
Sent: Monday, May 22, 2017 2:09:04 PM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada)
To: FMC.INFO
Cc: whayne.quin@hklaw.com
Subject: Comment on the SDEIS
Mr. Hunt,
We would like to comment on the SDEIS to be developed on a portion of the former Walter Reed Army
Medical Center in the District of Columbia. Following conversations we’ve had with the Department of
State, Children’s National would recommend that 14th street end in a cul-de-sac, at grade, to act as a
drop off close to our west entrance.
Thank you for your consideration.
Irene Thompson, MSPH, PMP
Project Director at Walter Reed
Children's National Medical Center
410-971-9676 / IThompson@childrensnational.org<mailto:IThompson@childrensnational.org>

Page 14

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Spangler, Russell A.
From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Hunt, Geoffrey A <HuntGA@state.gov>
Friday, May 19, 2017 9:02 AM
Charles Enos; Sandy Carroll (sandy.carroll@jacobs.com) (sandy.carroll@jacobs.com);
Sharpe, Katherine E.; Matthew Chalifoux
Choi, Grace H (M/OFM); Seagroves, Cliff C; Grant, Kimberly B; Hunt, Geoffrey A
FW: WR LRA comments on DOS Foreign Mission Center SDEIS

Importance:

High

Good morning all,
Additional comments from the Walter Reed Local Redevelopment Authority on the SDEIS etc.
Geoffrey
‐‐‐‐‐Original Message‐‐‐‐‐
From: FMC.INFO
Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 7:20 PM
To: Hunt, Geoffrey A; Parello, Joseph G
Subject: FW: WR LRA comments on DOS Foreign Mission Center SDEIS

________________________________________
From: Abernathy, Malaika (EOM)
Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 7:19:31 PM (UTC‐05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada)
To: Hunt, Geoffrey A; FMC.INFO
Cc: Clarke, Randall (EOM); Ozberk, Erkin (OP); Wiacek, Katie; Gabriel, Tracy (OP); Chamberlin, Anna (DDOT); Rogers,
Jonathan D. (DDOT)
Subject: WR LRA comments on DOS Foreign Mission Center SDEIS
Dear Mr. Hunt,
On behalf of the Walter Reed Local Redevelopment Authority, we appreciate the Department of State's efforts to
engage the community and District government agencies in the development of the SDEIS.
I am writing to provide comments on the Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement (SDEIS) issued on March
2017, for the Foreign Mission Center on the site formerly known as the Walter Reed Army Medical Center. We look
forward to collaborating with DOS, our sister agencies (DDOT, OP, DDOE) and our master development team, Hines,
Urban‐Atlantic, and Triden on future FMC discussions.
3.6 ‐ Transportation
.
ROW coordination. Develop compatible ROW widths for all streets intersecting both LRA and DOS portions of the
site. ROW widths should meet DDOT's minimum standards. Collaborate with the District to determine ideal ROW for
1

Page 15

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Dahlia and Main Drive. Targeting sustainability features within the ROW should contribute to the site's overall
sustainability goals.
.
Open access for pedestrians and bicyclists across the WRAMC site. The LRA supports east‐west access along Dahlia
Street, as well as north‐south access via 14th Street. Additional east‐west and north‐south pedestrian and bike
connections are encouraged and should be coordinated with DDOT and the LRA.
.
Access for vehicles. The LRA Reuse and Small Area Plan ("SAP") supports integrating the site within the community.
When considering access options for 14th and Dahlia Street, adequate circulation and permeability on the periphery
should be underscored. Coordination of this topic should be considered with CNMC, LRA and surrounding community
organizations.
.
Shared parking options with LRA. Proposed on‐site parking should be adequate for FMC employees and visitors.
Where appropriate, shared parking opportunities with LRA should be discussed.
3.9.1 ‐ Land Use and Zoning
.
Provide for open space throughout the DOS portion of the site. Throughout the community planning process, the
LRA heard from community residents that they would like to see the preservation of open space that maintains the
character of the site. The LRA supports preserving historic landscaped resources and supports the DOS creation of new
and active open and green areas.
.
Designate office and/or higher density land uses in areas that are compatible with the 2012 LRA Reuse Plan and the
Small Area Plan. Per exhibit 1.4 Building Heights, we recommend placing higher density land uses closer to the proposed
Town Center, which would encourage synergies, reduce overall impact to adjacent low‐density residential neighbors
surrounding the site.
.
Coordinate with the LRA to allow interim uses on the DOS portion of the site. This will assist in branding the area
and to activate the overall site. Interim uses could include historic walking tours, movie nights or small festivals, as
currently planned by the master developer on the LRA portion of the site.
.
Ensure compatibility with the Walter Reed Re‐Use SAP recommendations and design guidelines. The LRA requests
that the plan be compatible with the SAP, which recommends urban design guidelines for future development. The SAP
was approved by the DC Council April 2013. We encourage future design guidelines discussions with OP, master
developer, and the LRA.
Thank you,
Malaika
Malaika Abernathy Scriven
Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning & Economic Development Walter Reed Project Manager
1350 Pennsylvania Ave, NW Suite 317
Washington, DC 20004
Work: 202‐545‐3123 Fax: 202‐727‐6703 Cell: 202‐340‐7285 malaika.abernathy2@dc.gov

‐‐‐‐‐Original Message‐‐‐‐‐
From: Hunt, Geoffrey A [mailto:HuntGA@state.gov]
2

Page 16

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 17

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

3-1

Page 18

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 19

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Page 20

Please find additional comments from the ANC 4a and ANC 4A08 .
Thank you

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Geoffrey
From: FMC.INFO
Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 8:40 AM
To: Hunt, Geoffrey A; Parello, Joseph G
Subject: FW: FMC Comments ANC 4A08

From: Black, Gale B. (ANC 4A08)
Sent: Thursday, May 18, 2017 8:39:04 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada)
To: FMC.INFO
Cc: Gale Black; Green, Phyllis (SMD 4A01); Whatley, Stephen (ANC 4A03); Pope, Deborah (SMD 4A05)
Subject: FMC Comments ANC 4A08

As the ANC 4A commissioner for ANC 4A08, Crestwood, I offer these comments. I associate my comments
with those of the Shepherd Park Citizens Association and former ANC 4A Chair Joseph Hairston. I have 4 areas
of concern: 1) security, 2) environmental, 3) impact on the transportation system at 16th and Van Buren,
Georgia and Fern and Georgia and Van Buren; and 4) impact on surrounding neighborhoods due to the unmet
demand and need to accommodate foreign missions, which require large lots. Each foreign mission would be
responsible for meeting its own security and parking needs. How would this be enforced? I also think having a
cul de sac would not allow an exit. I prefer Alternative Option D, Exhibit 53. Finally, I do have concerns regard
the PCB impacted soils, the removal of the radioactive materials that may be there and the removal of the
asbestos. Neither I, nor the residents of Crestwood, were able to review the entire 430 page Environmental
Impact statement. These should be considered my personal views and offered as preliminary comments on
behalf of my single member district, Crestwood, which is in Ward 4, ANC 4A. Gale Black, SMD 4A08

5-1

1

Page 21

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Page 22

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 23

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

7-1

Page 24

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 25

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

9-1

Page 26

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

12-1

Page 27

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

15-1
15-2
15-3

17-1

Page 28

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Page 29

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Page 30

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Foreign Missions Center Comment Form
Survey software provided by

https://www.surveygizmo.com

http://www.surveygizmo.com/s3/offline/index.php?__slug=www.surveygizmo.com/s3/offline/1550716
/2562e1122d31&sLanguage=Auto
Response 01
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
The environmental impact statement seems pretty good and comprehensive except that the construction
impact does not address rodent control (standard practice for demolition/excavation construction and
legally required in jurisdictions such as DC, Baltimore, Chicago, Boston, etc.). Some of the better
requirements state that demolition cannot occur until it submits and receives approval of a preventionoriented rodent control (rats) program. Some of the better required practices are that a building must be
certified rodent/rat free (as well as asbestos free) before demolition excavation begins. For basic
excavation a barrier plan such as used for the Boston Big Dig should be implemented well-before
excavation is undertaken. Getting rid of spill over rats after they have invaded a neighborhood is a major
and painful challenge.

10-1

Full Name (optional): Wendell Joice
Address (optional): 6661 13th Street NW%2C DC 20012
Email Address (optional): wjoice2@comcast.net
Phone number (optional): 202 578 4421
Response 02
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
This is a followup to my previously submitted response on rodent control. I forgot to add another
suggestion. Given that this project involves several entities (individual chanceries, DC government,
National Children's center, and all the other entities such as retail on the DC side), that the project will be
under way for years, given that it is likely that each entity will be responsible for its own rodent control
plan and given that there is common ground (property) separate from individual entity responsibility it
would be helpful that there be an overall basic plan to which each entity would ascribe. Hopefully,
someone such at DOS will take the lead to pull together the other major entities to develop and sign off on
a basic rodent control plan separate from the individual plans. This would make things more effective and
organized.
Full Name (optional): Wendell Joice
Address (optional): 6661 13th Street NW%2C DC%2C 20012
Email Address (optional): wjoice2@comcast.net
Phone number (optional): 202 578 4421

Page 31

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Response 03
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:

14-2
14-1

What will be the plan to reduce vehicular traffic within the residential neighborhood (Shepherd Park). I
understand the current plan for an under ground parking garage for the FMC but what other parking plans
are in place for the LRA -- to address parking overflow into the neighborhood.
Full Name (optional): Rahsan
Address (optional): 1213 Holly Street
Email Address (optional): biz_tek@yahoo.com
Phone number (optional):

Response 04
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Please provide a walking tour of the State Dept portion of Walter Reed. Many of us in the community
have not been there in a great while and it would help in understanding the maps text and diagrams of the
proposed changes.
Full Name (optional): Loretta Neumann
Address (optional): 7124 Piney Branch Rd NW, DC 20012
Email Address (optional): LNeu@rcn.com
Phone number (optional): 202-882-9274

Response 05
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
The turn onto 14th Street is very difficult. I am also very concerned that this will force traffic into my
neighborhood north of Fern. It also appears that there will be a major bottleneck at 14th and Main.
Please close this access point.
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

2

Page 32

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Response 06
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
As a stakeholder in the immediate area, what I would like to see: Historic Preservation - Please place
emphasis on preserving the Chapel as a community fixture.
Full Name (optional): Alexander Lofft
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional): alofft@martekglobal.com
Phone number (optional): 202-230-3055

Response 07
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
As a stakeholder in the immediate area, what I would like to see: Historic Preservation - Please place
emphasis on preserving - Building 40, 41 and 56 as integral to the full 100 acre combined site
Full Name (optional): Alexander Lofft
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional): alofft@martekglobal.com
Phone number (optional): 202-230-3055

Response 08
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
As a stakeholder in the immediate area, what I would like to see: Historic Preservation - Please place
emphasis on preserving - consider moving /clustering single family homes (that are in good enough
condition) to recreate a DC residential street to further integrate site into surrounding neighborhood

11-1

Full Name (optional): Alexander Lofft
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional): alofft@martekglobal.com
Phone number (optional): 202-230-3055

3

Page 33

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Response 09
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:

11-3

More on Neighborhood Integration: permanently opening the gates along 16th and Alaska Ave to allow
pass-through pedestrian/cycle/vehicle traffic
Full Name (optional): Alexander Lofft
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional): alofft@martekglobal.com
Phone number (optional): 202-230-3055

Response 10
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:

11-2

More on Neighborhood Integration: if the houses are preservable, can they be clustered in a residential
block of 1/6 acre sites? Thank you for taking these comments into consideration
Full Name (optional): Alexander Lofft
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional): alofft@martekglobal.com
Phone number (optional): 202-230-3055

Response 11
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Enable/encourage streetcar connection to Metro (as much as this property might affect that decision)
Full Name (optional): Alexander Lofft
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional): alofft@martekglobal.com
Phone number (optional): 202-230-3055

4

Page 34

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Response 12
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
How will the Federal historic preservation process interact with the DC requirements
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

Response 13
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Will Rock Creek park access be impacted with the FMC?
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

Response 14
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Where will the Capital Bikeshare stations be located?
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

5

Page 35

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

Response 15
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
How will the State Department budget impact with the funding of the project%3F
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

Response 16
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Please offer a walking tour of the State Dept side of Walter Reed. Many of us have not been there in a
great while! Seeing it helps to understand the maps%2C text and photos.
Full Name (optional): Loretta Neumann
Address (optional): 7124 Piney Branch Road NW
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

Response 17
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Please do not re-open 14th St, NW at Alaska. This will create too much traffic in my neighborhood
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

6

Page 36

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

Response 18
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Do not open 14th St. (at Alaska)...it'll cause too much traffic in the neighborhood!
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

Response 19
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
Please don't open 14th street at Alaska. This will cause too much traffic in the neighborhood. SO much
traffic.
Full Name (optional):
Address (optional):
Email Address (optional):
Phone number (optional):

Response 20
Please enter your comment about the Foreign Missions Center here:
As a neighbor my family is excited about the future of the FMC here at WR. Our one suggestion, which
has been stated repeatedly, is that 14th St NOT be opened as a through street. Ending in a cul-de-sac at
the Children's Hospital site and allowing only pedestrian and bicycle access beyond that is a perfect
solution. Otherwise, thumbs up on everything that the Dept of State is doing with their portion of the site.
Full Name (optional): Christopher Alexander
Address (optional): 7515 16th ST NW
Email Address (optional): ch.alexander30@gmail.com
Phone number (optional): 703.798.1036

7

Page 37

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

1

THE PUBLIC HEARING FOR THE
FOREIGN MISSIONS CENTER
DRAFT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT

Held at:
Red Cross Building #41
Dahlia Street NW
Washington, D.C.

Thursday, April 20, 2917
6:30 p.m. - 8:30 p.m.

Reported & transcribed by: Linda Giles, Court Reporter

Page 38

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

2

A P P E A R A N C E S

Cliff Seagroves - DOS, OFM
Adam Botner - DOS
Geoffrey Hunt - DOS
Christine Kwon - DOS
Kimberly Grant - DOS
Grace Choi - DOS
John Solano - DOS
Taushia Walker - DOS
Alice Church - DOS
Joan Morningstar - DOS
Sandy Carroll - Jacobs
Matthew Chalifoux - EYP, Inc.
Charles Enos - EYP, Inc.
Kate Sharpe - GF
Irwin Andras - Gorove/Slade
Theo Brown - Public Engagement
Kim Sescoe - Public Engagement

* * * * *

Page 39

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

3

C O N T E N T S

PRESENTATION:

PAGE

Welcome, Theo Brown

4

Introduction/Overview, Cliff Seagroves

6

Presentation, Kate Sharpe

16

PUBLIC COMMENTERS:

PAGE

Kerry Braxton

21

Edmund Atkins

23

Angela Schmidt

30

Loretta Newman

31

Joseph Hairston

34

Lee Adams

36

June Confer

38

James Walker

41

Jeff Brown

42

* * * * *

Page 40

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

4

1

P R O C E E D I N G S

2
3
4
5

MR. BROWN:

6

Welcome to the formal public

7

hearing on the NEPA process for the Environmental

8

Impact Statement on the Foreign Mission Center

9

masterplan.

My name is Theo Brown.

I’m with Public

10

Engagement Associates.

I’ve had the privilege of

11

facilitating a number of meetings over the past several

12

years on the reuse of the Walter Reed property.

13

some familiar faces here of people who came to many

14

meetings when we were doing public input on the LRA

15

side.

I see

Some of you have been involved in the early

16
17

meetings on this process also.

And it’s great to have

18

you here.

19

exemplary on this entire project.

20

input from the community.

21

officials have done a good job of, so far in what I’ve

I think the public engagement has been
Having so much good

And I think the public

Page 41

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

5

1

seen certainly, incorporating that.

2

you’re here tonight for the discussions, which many of

3

you took part in and now for the formal hearing.
We have a simple format, which we’re going to

4
5

explain here in a moment.

6

take your comments.

7

session or discussion as we’ve had in the past, but to

8

get your comments on the public record.

9

comments here will be transcribed and shared and

Basically, we’re here to

This is not a question and answer

And all the

10

responded to in various ways.

11

to hearing from as many of you want to testify.

We really look forward

We will be here with the public hearing until

12
13

8:30; stay for as long of that as you wish.

14

others will be joining us, some people will be coming

15

and going to make their comments.

16

you’re here and that you’ve shown this continued

17

interest in this important project.

We know

But we’re delighted

Just a couple of announcements.

18

Page 42

And we’re glad

If you

19

haven’t already found them, the rest rooms are in the

20

back.

21

you, on this warm evening, need to have a drink of

22

water.

There is still some water over on this side if

Also, there will continue to be the opportunity

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

6

1

for written comments over here at this station or on

2

the cards you received earlier.

3

to you to make written comments.

4

hours, we will be focusing our attention on the verbal

5

comments that you want to make about any aspect of the

6

masterplan and the information that you just saw.

7

Feel free as it occurs
But for the next two

Right now, I want to introduce Cliff

8

Seagroves.

You saw him on the video, some of you, most

9

of you, when you came in.

He’s the acting director of

10

the Office of Foreign Missions, who will say a bit more

11

about our purpose here this evening.

12

MR. SEAGROVES:

13

you, welcome back to Walter Reed.

14

here for the first time.

15

it Water Reed, but it’s certainly is transitioning to

16

its new future.

Good evening.

For some of

Some of you, welcome

I guess we will always call

17

Again, the purpose of tonight’s hearing is to

18

provide an opportunity for the public to make comments

19

on the Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact

20

Statement prior to our finalization of the document.

21
22

The public hearing is designed primarily as a
listening session.

Thus, there will be time dedicated,

Page 43

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

7

1

in a few minutes, where you’ll be able to submit your

2

comments either verbally here for all of us, or as a

3

written comment at one of the stations or on one of the

4

cards.

5

to get all that information so that we can review it

6

and take it into consideration as we finalize our

7

process.

8
9

In 1982, Congress enacted the Foreign Missions
Act, which reaffirmed the federal government’s

10

jurisdiction over the operation of foreign missions and

11

international organizations in the United States.

12

Act established my office, the Office of Foreign

13

Missions within the Department of State, to review and

14

control the operation of foreign missions and the

15

benefits made available to them.

16

to set the terms and conditions whereby benefits may be

17

provided, and sets forth the mechanisms and criteria of

18

where foreign missions can be located in the District

19

of Columbia.

20

Page 44

As mentioned earlier, we certainly will go on

The

The Act empowers OFM

Section 206 of the Act establishes procedures

21

and criteria governing specifically the location,

22

replacement or expansion of chanceries in the District.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

8

Subject to the requirements of the Foreign

1
2

Missions Act, OFM manages all acquisitions, including

3

leases, renovations, construction, sales, dispositions

4

of any real property assets of foreign missions

5

throughout the United States.

6

that such actions are done consistent with national

7

security interest, reciprocity and applicable local and

8

international law.

In doing so, we assure

The Department utilized its authority under

9
10

the Foreign Missions Act to accept transfer of this

11

property.

12

the purposes of the new Foreign Missions Center, which

13

will be a purpose-built neighborhood of embassies.

14

It also allows us to redevelop the site for

Our fist chancery center is the International

15

Chancery Center, located near the intersection of Van

16

Ness and Connecticut Avenue, Northwest, where we have

17

almost 20 chanceries located.

18

visited that property in the past.

19

You may have seen or

Pursuant to the Department’s authority under

20

the Foreign Missions Act, on July 14, 2015, Patrick

21

Kennedy, the then Under Secretary of State for

22

Management, formally designated the acquisition and use

Page 45

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

9

1

of this property, including construction or renovation

2

of facility by Foreign Missions at this center as well

3

as access to and use of roads, sidewalks and other

4

common areas, and other public services, to be of

5

benefit to Foreign Missions as defined under the

6

Foreign Missions Act.

7
8

Department of States regulation of the acquisition and

9

use of property here, as well as use of the roads and

10

the common areas, a regulation of that is reasonably

11

necessary in order to facilitate relations between the

12

United States and foreign governments.

13

protect the interest of the United States; and three,

14

to adjust for cost and procedures of attaining benefits

15

of missions of the United States abroad.

16

Also, to

Under Secretary Kennedy’s decision under the

17

Foreign Mission Act, further establishes the process

18

through which Foreign Missions will be authorized to

19

acquire, use and dispose of property and to construct

20

or renovate facilities here at this campus.

21
22

Page 46

He then also, formally determined that the

Such actions are subject to all terms and
conditions established in this regard by the director

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

10

1

of the Office of Foreign Missions.

2

and determination under the Foreign Missions Act to

3

develop the 32 acres here at the former Walter Reed

4

Army Medical Center, was published in the Federal

5

Register on July 27, 2015, Volume 80, Number 143.

6

This designation

Before I go forward, I’d like to introduce a

7

couple of the members of our team at the State

8

Department that may or may not be up here taking

9

questions later.

10

We have Adam Bodner there in the back, and

11

Geoffrey Hunt, both from the department’s Office of

12

Real Property Management.

13

Grace Choi, Taushia Walker, Kimberly Grant, John

14

Solano, Christine Kwon, Alice Church (phonetic), Joan

15

Morningstar (phonetic) -- where did she go?

16

somewhere.

17

Foreign Missions and we’re all happy to be here with

18

you tonight.

19

We have some of my team,

She’s here

They’re all members of the Office of

Additionally, we have our consultants who have

20

been with us throughout this journey.

We have Matt

21

Chalifoux with EYP, Historic Preservation Consultant,

22

Kate Sharpe, who you’ll hear from later, Charles Enos,

Page 47

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

11

1

Erwin Andres, Sandy Carroll, and you’ve already heard

2

from our moderator, Theo Brown.

3

is Kim Sescoe with Public Engagement Associates.

4

Now that I’ve done those introductions, I’ll

5

go through the view of our proposed project and a brief

6

description of our masterplan.

7

Foreign Missions Center property will remain

8

in federal ownership.

9

simple parcels here to foreign governments.

We will not be selling feeInstead,

10

we will be issuing long-term ground leases on

11

reciprocal terms to the countries that would acquire

12

property here.

13

The masterplan that we will begin to work on

14

is intended to guide the development of the project in

15

concert with the rest of the historic campus

16

redevelopment.

17

cohesive campus plan as we move forward.

18

guidelines that we develop will guide all of these

19

processes on our side of the campus.

20

Page 48

And the floor monitor

And as well, we will be looking at the
The design

Each foreign mission that locates here will

21

individually design their chanceries.

Each foreign

22

government would deploy the design for their

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

12

1

development and plan on their parcel in a manner that’s

2

almost identical to how that process worked at the

3

International Chancery Center.

4

includes consultations and reviews by the Commission of

5

Fine Arts and the final review is by the National

6

Capital Planning Commission.

That review process

We are very respectful and proud of this

7
8

location and of its historic significance.

We’re also

9

focused on celebrating and enhancing the natural

10

features of the site, which we’re happy to see that --

11

on our side, we think we have so many trees, which is a

12

very unique aspect of this part of the city and we want

13

to continue to make sure that remains a feature.

14

Also, no different from the existing chancery

15

center that I mentioned over on Connecticut Avenue, we

16

have no intention for the campus to be closed.

17

will be a place where people work or come to visit, or

18

come to events.

19

past, and certainly while we’ve been waiting to reopen

20

the campus, the gates will be open.

21

closed.

22

walking through the property.

This

Unlike how it has been in the recent

It will not be

And we hope that everyone will come and enjoy

Page 49

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

13

We look forward to our plan to reuse the

1
2

memorial chapel, which you would have passed by on your

3

way in.

4

property, more than we anticipated we’d be using it.

5

Almost once a week we have an event there.

6

exactly a month ago, we had a treaty signing day with

7

the government of Greece.

8

facility that we are continuing to find ways to reuse

9

for our mission and our purposes.

Just almost

And so it’s a beautiful

We’re also looking at ways to maximize the

10
11

potential reuse of other historic buildings and

12

specifically this building we’re in now.

13

is ready to go.

14

furniture for them.

15

and have actively been marketing that.

This building

If MFC wants to move in, the army left
We’re ready for that to take place

Although the potential will probably exist for

16

Page 50

Our office already actively uses that

17

us to have more chanceries than we are currently

18

anticipating, we do expect to have between 8 to 12

19

chanceries here.

20

countries will want more than sort of one parcel or one

21

acre.

22

Maybe a few that are larger.

We expect that a number of those

There will be a majority of two-acre parcels.
But we are not strictly

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

14

1

diving it up the way we did at the existing center,

2

over forty years ago, where all the parcels were only a

3

maximum of one acre.

4

bit and so we’re not sticking to that same formula for

5

all the parcels.

We thought that was short-sided a

Lastly, why do we need to do this?

6
7

big city, why bring chanceries here?

8

other places in the city?

This is a

Why can’t they go

This is something we’ve been looking at for

9
10

years.

11

- legislation to develop it was passed in 1968.

12

the mid-90s it was almost completely built out.

13

Really, one of the last buildings is going up as we

14

speak.

15

So there’s no more opportunity to build at that site.

16

Again, the existing chancery center was first And by

It’s almost done, the new Embassy of Morocco.

One of the driving motivations for that

17

campus, which is no different from this campus, was

18

that we are one of the smallest national capitals in

19

the word, geographically, but Washington DC hosts the

20

largest population of foreign embassies in the world.

21
22

We have to balance all of these needs that are
unique to our city. We want to balance that with the

Page 51

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

15

1

needs of the citizenry, the needs of the foreign

2

governments, the needs of the federal government.

3

if we are unable to have suitable land resources in the

4

District or our Nation’s Capital for foreign embassies,

5

that has a direct impact on our ability to have

6

suitable real estate resources for our needs in other

7

countries.
We continued to look for opportunities to make

8
9

Page 52

And

it easier to address all those needs and we have found

10

that campuses like this have been a successful way to

11

do that.

12

bit more and not be as centrally located in say

13

Sheridan Kalorama or Massachusetts Avenue where there

14

really is a heavy concentration of missions there.

And to encourage embassies to spread out a

15

That’s just because that’s historically where

16

they have been, but the facilities they are in are all

17

early 19th Century Mansions.

18

suitable as modern day office buildings.

19

trend that we see that are wanting to purpose build

20

something for the future and a place like this would

21

allow that in a way that would be respectful to the

22

history here and both the past and future.

They’re not really
That’s the

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

16

I think that’s all I have.

1

With that

2

overview, I will now turn it over to Kate Sharpe for

3

the next part of our presentation.
MS. SHARPE:

4

Hi there.

Thank you.

We’re here tonight

5

because of the National Environmental Policy Act or

6

NEPA.

7

agency for the project will decide what feature action

8

will be taken after they receive input from the public

9

and from other federal and district agencies.

The Department of State, who is the lead federal

This

10

decision about the Foreign Missions Center and what to

11

build will be made in accordance with both NEPA and

12

other related laws and presidential executive orders.

13

NEPA requires federal agencies to integrate

14

environmental values into their decision making.

15

Basically, they need to consider the environmental

16

impacts of their proposed actions and consider

17

reasonable alternatives as well.

18
19
20

This decision making process is recorded in an
Environmental Impact Statement.
The Environmental Impact Statement has some

21

required sections.

It has to talk about the purpose

22

and need for the proposed action, which Cliff just

Page 53

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

17

1

talked about a little bit here.

2

alternatives that were considered, and what the

3

potential environmental impacts could be from the

4

proposed action.

5

agencies and the people who are consulted during the

6

planning process.

It also needs to document the

The ultimate objective of an Environmental

7
8

Impact Statement is to identify a solution.

9

solution should achieve the project purpose.

The
It should

10

meet the needs and it should minimize adverse

11

environmental and social impacts at a reasonable cost.
The Environmental Impact Statement for this

12
13

project, which a lot of you probably realize was first

14

circulated as a public draft back in February 2014; and

15

then because the project acreage has changed from the

16

43 to the 32 acres, we’re now in the supplemental

17

draft, Environmental Impact Statement phase of the

18

project.

19

Page 54

The different

And the reason we issued a supplemental draft

20

is just to make sure that we fully evaluated changes to

21

the master plan that occurred as a result of the change

22

in acreage when Children’s came onto the property.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

18

1

If you look at the written document, at this

2

version of the supplemental draft, you can see that the

3

comments that we received during our public meetings

4

back in 2014 were considered and incorporated into this

5

version of the document.

6

the comments that we received from you all.

7

Changes were made based on

Within the document, two alternative, a

8

preferred alternative, which has been described here

9

tonight, and a “no action” alternative were looked at.

10

Just to explain, “no action” is a little bit jargon.

11

“No action” is really a baseline comparison that we

12

developed to see what the impacts of the action

13

alterative would be so that we have a future to compare

14

one thing against another.

15

Multiple agencies participated when we were

16

developing the alternatives, including the National

17

Capital Planning Commission, the Council of fine Arts.

18

The District Department of the Environment and other

19

agencies as well.

20

After a supplemental draft is published, the

21

Department of State holds a public hearing, which is

22

what we’re doing tonight.

Just to mention, as well as

Page 55

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

19

1

the NEPA process, the Department of State is also

2

concurrently conducting a review process for the

3

National Historic Preservation Act.

4
5

considers the potential effect of developing a Foreign

6

Missions Center on historic resources.

7

like the Walter Reed historic District, Rock Creek

8

Park, any potential archeological resources that might

9

be on the site.

10

That would be

Any public comments that you might have

11

related to historic resources are also very welcomed

12

this evening.

13

To talk about the process going forward, this

14

document will then be published again when it’s a final

15

Environmental Impact Statement.

16

Environmental Impact Statement is published, Department

17

of State will publish a Record of Decision.

18

of Decision just basically explains why the preferred

19

alternative was chosen and describes how it will be

20

implemented.

21
22

Page 56

The National Historic Preservation Act

After the final

The Record

I think you’ve probably heard here already,
this evening, the official public comment period is

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

20

1

underway.

2

comments by May 18th, especially here this evening.

3

There are multiple ways to do that if you’d prefer not

4

to speak.

5

through the physical mail or fill out a comment card

6

here tonight.

You can certainly email comment, send them

information about how to submit comments.
With that I’ll turn it back over to Theo.

9
10

Please submit

If you look in your handout you can see

7
8

It lasts through May 18th.

Thanks.
MR. BROWN:

11

Okay.

That gives you a good

12

overview of where we are in this NEPA process and how

13

we’ll proceed this evening.

14

rest of our time basically hearing from any of you who

15

want to make public comments.

16

couple of people who have signed up to speak.

17

of others who have said maybe they would.

We’re going to spend the

I have the names of a
A couple

18

And then I’m thinking there are others of you

19

who want to share some thoughts, brief or whatever you

20

have, who have not yet signed up, and we’ll turn to

21

that.

22

I suggest that you come up here, actually, and

Page 57

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

21

1

speak.

2

first couple of rows here.

3

backs if you talk from that microphone.

4

to do that.

5

you to keep your comments to five minutes or less.

6

I will be timing that and reminding you if you get to

7

the time limit on the comments.

proceed.

I invite you

We invite you to make comments.

We ask
And

One thing, when you do come up, if you would

10

say your name.

11

Brown, like I have, you may want to spell your name to

12

make sure that the folks transcribing the meeting and

13

recording it get it correctly for the record.

14

again, every word you say as part of the comment, we

15

want your name to go into the record also.

17

And if it is not as common a name as

Because

The first name I have is Karrye Braxton.

16

You

begin.
MR. BRAXTON:

18

Page 58

You’ll be talking to their

With that said, as an overview of how we’ll

8
9

The State Department staff are mostly on the

Hello.

Good evening.

Karrye

19

Braxton.

I’m an ANC commissioner from ANC4A, but I’m

20

from SMD 4A06.

21

is K-A-R-R-Y-E, thanks to my parents.

22

giving comments, or asking questions from our chair,

And I will spell my first name, which
I’m actually

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

22

1

Commissioner, Steve Whatley.

2

send those comments in.

3

open until May 18th, I think the whole commission will

4

be able to send in comments before the records closes.

5

These are really questions for your
consideration when you finish putting together the

7

plan.

9

First thing is, how will you coordinate with
the master developer and the Children’s Medical Center

10

to assure that vermin, that is rats, mice, foxes, deer,

11

racoons -- leave anything out -- et cetera, are

12

controlled?
Second, which gates will be used for

13

6-2

In fact, since the records

6

8

6-1

And he’ll, of course,

14

constructions trucks?

Will Fern Street and Aspen

15

Street be avoided?

16

time period are we talking about trucks coming in and

17

out of the site?

And as a corollary to that, which

Three, who will be the point of contact for

18
19

issues?

We really request a single point of contact

20

for anything that comes up?

21

morning, someone in the evening, if the construction

22

and renovation will happen more than 12 hours.

Perhaps someone in the

Page 59

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

23

Fourth, will the old stately trees be

1
2

retained, and what is the plan for that?
Five, for any buildings being demolished, is

3
4

there a plan for asbestos control or other pathogen

5

control?

6

And that’s it.

7

MR. BROWN:

8

I had Ed Atkins.

9

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Next

If you want to come up here, Ed.

Thank you very much.

E-D-M-U-N-D A-T-K-I-N-S.

My name is

11

Edmund Atkins.

12

everyone.

13

evening.

14

Citizen’s Association.

15

stately homes of various styles and sizes, is

16

immediately adjacent to the Walter Reed site on its

17

North side.

18

Page 60

Okay.

MR. ATKINS:

10

Thank you very much.

Good evening

Thanks for the opportunity to speak this
I’m here representing the Shephard Park
Our neighborhood, composed of

Representatives from Shephard Park and other

19

nearby neighborhoods were active participants in the

20

planning process for developing the Walter Reed Site,

21

including the area presently under control of the

22

United States Department of State.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

24

1

We welcome the opportunity to comment on this

2

draft Environmental Impact Statement for the State

3

Department’s Foreign Missions Center.

4

that we have until May 18th of this year to submit

5

final comments and therefore, we reserve our right to

6

provide more input should the need arise.

7

We understand

While we are generally supportive of the

8

thrust of the draft Environmental Impact Statement, we

9

do have some concerns in the areas of traffic and

10

transit, security, design of new chanceries and access

11

to Building 57, the memorial chapel.

12

Under traffic and transit:

Shephard Park is a

13

tranquil, residential neighborhood that wishes to

14

maintain its essential character.

15

certainly applaud the requirement that, “each foreign

16

mission would be responsible for meeting parking needs,

17

employee and visitor on its individual lot.”

18

the executive summary points out.

19

As such, we

That’s as

The prohibition against on-street parking on

20

the State Department site is also laudatory and we

21

strongly support its creation and enforcement.

22

masterplan specifies that the majority of parking at

The FMC

Page 61

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

25

1

the chancery locations be provided in below grade lots.

2

We would like more definition on what

3

constitutes majority.

4

the sylvan aspects of the State Department site with

5

all the trees, as Karrye and others have mentioned, and

6

we would opposed the creation of buildings surrounding

7

by a sea of asphalt.

8

to 90 percent of parking for chanceries should be below

9

grade.

10

It seems to us that, at least, 80

We support the existing plan option, shown as

11

option C, which shows 14th Street terminating in a cul-

12

de-sac, centered on Building 54, the Armed Forces

13

Institute of Pathology main entrance, and the future

14

Children’s National Medical Center.

15

The proposed cul-de-sac would accommodate

16

pedestrians and bicycles, but no automobiles.

17

believe the FMC should be a well-defined area with

18

limited vehicular access from our neighborhood, as is

19

currently planned for Dahlia and Alaska.

20

Page 62

From our perspective, we enjoy

We

We strongly urge that Option C be the

21

preferred street layout selected in the final EIS and

22

constructed in the Foreign Missions Center.

We note

4-1

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

26

1

that when the Foreign Missions Center is built out,

2

there will be an increase in traffic, and several

3

intersections near out neighborhood would be impacted.

4

We encourage the Department of State to work closely

5

with DDOT and with our respective neighborhoods to

6

implement improvements to improve traffic flows at

7

these intersections well before the FMC is built out.

8

We concur that limiting heavy vehicle access

9

during construction and operations to Dahlia Street by

10

Georgia Avenue or Main Drive by 16th Street, works well

11

for maintaining residential character.

12

Similarly, we believe that the future WMATA

13

bus access should be limited to main drive.

We do not

14

-- and I’d like to emphasize this very strongly -- we

15

do not see the need for a neighborhood collector bus

16

along 12th Street, as was shown in the prior plan in

17

the next 20 years or even afterwards.

18

strongly oppose it if DDOT or WMATA were to propose it.

And we would

19

On Security, the Walter Reed site has been

20

closed to the public since 2001, and we applaud the

21

decision, as mentioned tonight, to open up the site to

22

the public at large.

The FMC will have up to 12

Page 63

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

27

1

chanceries who will be responsible for developing

2

security requirements for each chancery and then

3

coordinating with multi-jurisdictional authorities as

4

is done with the ICC on Van Ness Avenue.
MR. BROWN:

5
6

wrap up.

7

MR. ATKINS:

8

MR. BROWN:

9

a little extra time.

10

MR. ATKINS:

Oh my goodness.
Share what you can.

All right.

11

about that.

12

otherwise I would have -- anyway.

13

Okay.

You can take

I’m sorry

I didn’t realize there was a time limit,

The Secret Service is responsible for the

14

security of foreign missions in DC.

15

they reach out to neighborhood roots and to the fourth

16

district of the Metropolitan Police Department on an

17

ongoing basis.

18

neighborhood and its residence and we would like to

19

know them.

20

Page 64

Another 30 seconds if you could

We request that

We would like for them to know the

In the building design and character, we

21

encourage the Department of State to work with NCPC,

22

the National Capital Planning Commission, to ensure

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

28

1

that substantial compliance with federal regulations

2

concerning historic preservation are followed, and the

3

new construction of chanceries is compatible with

4

existing landmarks and districts.

5

chanceries to fit in with the architectural styles of

6

the campus.

7

We want the new

We don’t want any brutallus architecture.

Building 57, the Memorial Chapel:

According

8

to the draft EIS, Building 57 will be retained and

9

repurposed with the Department of State retaining

10

control of the building.

11

programmatic use of the facility has not been

12

finalized.

13

Capital Planning Commission hearing on the draft

14

masterplan.

15

The draft notes that the

I testified on March 2nd at the National

At that time, the plan stated that the

16

recommended reuse as an event and assembly venue for

17

Department of State and Foreign Missions and chanceries

18

in the greater DC area.

19

fellow citizens in surrounding neighborhoods, to have

20

an opportunity to use the chapel for such community

21

events as weddings, meetings and assemblies, consistent

22

with its original use and availability.

We reiterate our desire as

Page 65

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

29

We continue to urge the Department of State to

1
2

open up the chapel to the community use, with

3

appropriate security measures, obviously.
Finally, we believe that the Department of

4
5

State should continue to work with us and other

6

neighbor groups, concerning, but not limited to

7

traffic, security, to start preservation and openness.

8

Such a gesture would go a long way towards cementing

9

community support for the project and, most

10

importantly, demystify what the Foreign Missions Center

11

is all about.

12

Thank you and I’m sorry I went over my time.

13

MR. BROWN:

Thank you.

14

Okay, a couple of folks had indicated a possible

15

interest in testifying, Gale Black (phonetic).

16

here.
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

17
18

Is Gale

No, she did a written

testimony.
MR. BROWN:

19

Page 66

Thank you very much.

20

testimony.

21

read.

22

possibly.

Okay.

Norma?

All right.

Good.

Written

Then there’s a name I can’t quite

Naoma (phonetic)?

Who has signed up,

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

30

1

MS. NORMA:

I will do a written.

2

MR. BROWN:

Okay.

All right, those

3

are the only names I have of folks who have signed up

4

in advance.

5

interested to come and comment.

6

you would come up front here.

7

spell it since we don’t have here, to make sure we get

8

it for the record.

We invite anybody else here who is

MS. SCHMIDT:

9

Hi.

Yes, I see some.

If

And say your name and

My name is Angela Schmidt

10

(phonetic) and I live in the 1400 block of Floral

11

Street, Northwest.

12

a lovely quiet block and I want to keep it that way.

13

have suggestions specific to that block, which is just

14

a half a block away here.

I’ve been there for 22 years.

It’s
I

I’m concerned that my block will be used as a

15

16-1

Great.

Thank you.

16

shortcut to get to and from the property from 16th

17

Street.

18

Street, so that would really be my preference.

19

what I propose is if Dahlia Street is open, that there

20

be -- currently, you cannot turn left from southbound

21

16th onto Alaska.

22

left turn lane there and allow left turns from 16th

First of all, I love the plan that closes 14th
Then,

I would propose that they make a

Page 67

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

31

1

onto Alaska so that people won’t be tempted to use my

2

street as a cut through.
And then my other suggestion just involves

3
4

some signage, if 14th Street is open, to prevent people

5

from leaving into the neighborhood and also prevent

6

people from turning left from 16th Street, into my

7

neighborhood, in the early morning hours when they

8

might be going to work.
Those are my street-specific, selfish

9
10

suggestions.

MR. BROWN:

11

Yes.

Someone else like to share some

12

thoughts?

13

with a particular organization or just give us your

14

name.

Again, identify yourself, if you’re

LORETTA NEWMAN:

15

Page 68

Thank you.

Hi.

My name is Loretta

16

Newman (phonetic).

I’m representing actually three

17

entities.

18

Takoma, DC, so it’s the other side of Georgia Avenue.

19

In fact, trying to get here tonight was very difficult

20

because it was closed, the Dahlia entrance.

21

fella on Butternut that gives access didn’t know

22

anything about tonight’s meeting.

First of all, myself because I live in

And the

In the future, I

16-1 cont.

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

32

1

would suggest if you’re going to do this, for our sake,

2

please inform them and us about how to enter the place.
But I also represent the Committee of 100 on

3
4

the Federal City, which is the oldest citizen’s

5

planning organization in Washington, DC, and I’m

6

involved in all kinds of things.

7

specifically on historic preservation in a minute.

8

also president of the Alliance to preserve the Civil

9

War Defenses of Washington.

I’m going to speak
I’m

In 1864, there was the Battle of Fort Stevens.

10
11

It was the only battle in the nation’s capital and the

12

confederates were encamped all over this area of Walter

13

Reed.

14

all know where that is, off Georgia Avenue and 13th

15

Street.

16

ever been shot at and come under fire under a battle,

17

so it’s extremely nationally important.

18

The battle was at Fort Stevens.

I assume you

It was the only time a sitting president has

We’re concerned about the history of this area

19

because of that battle as well.

20

archeological resources as well, so any work that goes

21

on here could have an impact on those issues.

22

There are

I just want to point out a couple things

Page 69

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

33

1

wearing all my hats.

2

I know these fellas well, so I’ve appreciated what the

3

State Department has been doing and the outreach, so

4

I’m not complaining about that.

5

But I do have concerns on historic

6

preservation, and that making sure that saving, as Ed

7

Atkins -- where did he go, I know, he’s an old friend -

8

- that the historic buildings are saved.

9

some that are contributing buildings, but they’re not,

And there are

10

apparently, going to be saved.

11

The old houses, you know the ones I mean, the

12

bungalows.

13

I’m very concerned.

On the other hand, I’m very appreciative of

14

the fact of some of them are doing a lot of outreach to

15

try to make sure that the new chanceries use them.

16

all I can say is they need to stress that.

17

don’t make that something that’s a requirement, even,

18

of the proposals that the chanceries make, we might

19

lose some historic resources as a result.

20

Page 70

I’ll have some comments later and

And

If they

They have to come under the federal law, but

21

it’s kind of tenuous on what they have to come under

22

the DC law, so we’ll hold their feet to the fire.

From

13-1

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

34

1

the historic preservation aspect, that’s the Committee

2

of 100 interest.
From the Alliance to preserve the Civil War

3
4

Defenses of Washington, we really want to preserve as

5

much as possible of the open space.

6

doesn’t look like it did in 1864, the fact is the

7

confederates were encamped here.

8

space, as much as possible -- on the DC side, they are

9

saving Cameron Glen.

Even though it

And just having the

That helps a lot to give people a

10

sense of what it might have been back then.

11

of the campus is also part of the historic issues

12

dealing with the Battle of Fort Stevens and what

13

happened back then.
I will also add other comments in writing

14
15

later.

16

them.

19

I just wanted everybody here to know about

MR. BROWN:

17
18

This part

here.

Thank you.

Thank you, sir.
MR. HAIRSTON:

Who else?

Yes, right

Come right up.
I’m Joseph Hairston, that’s H-

20

A-I-R-S-T-O-N, and my ancestor is the guy that fought

21

the battle at Fort Stevens.

22

I’m concerned about transportation matters.

Page 71

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

35

1

You’ve heard a lot about 14th Street and the gates.

2

had a battle here a few years ago, when Walter Reed

3

wanted to do some funny things about traffic.

4

finally got the National Capital Planning Commission to

5

see it the community way.

And we

6

A problem with the community is that, as all

7

of you know, we are a commuter route, 16th Street and

8

Georgia Avenue.

9

the rush hour, if you open the 14th Street gate, the

10

traffic will peel off the community streets into our

11

neighborhood.

Our concern before was that, during

But we’ve got a mixed problem.

As you heard, some of us want to use 14th

12
13

Street, and I think there is a solution to it.

14

the gate from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.

15

commuters from milking over and allows the people who

16

live here to use the street for the easy access

17

downtown.

18

Page 72

We

Close

That stops the

So, you have your cake and you eat it too.
The other thing is that the chapel is special.

19

One of my retirements is the Army.

When I think of all

20

the weddings and funerals that took place at that

21

chapel, and all the Christmas celebrations that took

22

place at that chapel, that it ought to remain as a

8-1

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

36

1
2

religious place.
I don’t care which religion it is, but

3

preserve something that’s -- you know, if you were

4

married someplace, would you like it -- that is to

5

assume you like the people you’re married to.

6

you like to go back to that same place and maybe have a

7

second wedding, or just to walk around and lie about

8

what it was like the first time.

9
10
11
12

Those are my comments.
MR. BROWN:
who’s next?

Yes.

Wouldn’t

Thank you very much.

Thank you, Mr. Hairston.

Yes,

Come on right up here.

MS. ADAMS:

Good evening fellow neighbors,

13

State Department people, architects and engineers.

14

name is Lee Adams (phonetic).

15

Takoma/DC neighborhood, and I hadn’t planned on

16

commenting.

17

much personal as anything else.

18

My

I’m a resident of the

My interest in Walter Reed has been as

When I was child, my father was in the army

19

and Walter Reed was our family doctor.

Both of my

20

parents -- I said goodbye to both of them here.

21

spent 10 months as a child in the children’s ward here,

22

which many of you don’t even know it existed.

I

Page 73

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

37

1
2

sitting thinking do I have anything to add to this

3

conversation.

4

opportunity that ought not to be missed and it has to

5

do with education.

6

terms of STEM science, the kinds of things that Walter

7

Reed really, really did some seminal work in, and

8

cultural education.

9

I think we have an incredible

Historical education, education in

The State Department being here is just a

10

wonderful opportunity, especially for children.

11

would like to express the hope that the Department

12

somehow organize, either with another institution or on

13

its own, tours for neighborhood children who are in

14

public schools, but not at the school that’s going to

15

be here on the campus.

16

activities, you know, festivals.

17

Page 74

But my interest -- at this point, I was

And I

Perhaps some cross cultural

In the chapel, in particular, I’m sure there

18

are festivals that are specific to some of the

19

countries that will be living here.

20

wonderful to have our children participate with the

21

children who will be living here and whose parents will

22

be working here in the chanceries.

It would be

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

38

1

That’s my hope for the future.

2

MR. BROWN:

3

Thank you very much.

Thanks.
Yes, next.

Just come right on up.
MS. CONFER:

4

My name is June Confer.

Confer

5

is like conference without eh “ence.”

I’ve been living

6

here in Shephard Park on Geranium Street since 1973.

7

For over 30 years, I was employed at Shephard

8

Elementary School, which is the public school in

9

Shephard Park.
My concern is to follow up on an educational

10
11

concern.

It doesn’t have anything to do with the

12

environment really.

13

of Columbia International School, and then down 14th

14

Street, some seven blocks, we have Shephard Elementary

15

School, which is a Pre-K 3 through grade 5 school.

16

is also one of the only international bachelorette

17

schools in the city, one of two primary URIS (phonetic)

18

programs.

19

middle school and secondary school.

We will have the DCI, the District

It

DCI is also an international bachelorette

At the international school, the three

20
21

languages that they will offer are Chinese, French, and

22

Spanish.

At Shephard, the two languages that they

Page 75

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

39

1

offer are French and Spanish.
It is a concern of mine, speaking for the

2
3

neighborhood, that when the chanceries are chosen -- we

4

already have an indication that the Chinese chancery

5

will be here.

6

other 8-11 chanceries that will be on this campus, that

7

we will have a French speaking and a Spanish speaking

8

embassy so that we can, in fact, enhance those

9

educational relationships.
In the time I have been here in Shephard Park,

10
11

we used to have annual festivals to which Charles

12

Jackson (phonetic), who was then the PR person, would

13

invite all of the children of Shephard elementary

14

school.

15

participate in, as it were then, the Native American

16

festival.

17

And they would walk up 14th Street in gown and

Also, the pathology building, which I passed,

18

my other son, who is now 55, used to play hooky with

19

his friend from Shephard elementary 6th grade in order

20

to come to the pathology lab.

21
22

Page 76

If that is true, we hope that in the

He would go and look at all the brains and
the skeletons and the whatever, and would hang out with

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

40

1

the various scientist who were there.

2

The other thing that happened every year, was

3

that the scientist from the hospital would participate

4

as judges for the school’s annual science fair.

5

they also, sometimes, served at mentors.

6

And

To change that over, I do not know what the

7

STEM relationship is with the embassies, but I do know

8

that they offer an enormous depth of cultural

9

contributions that could, in fact, be mentoring for

10

children, PK3 through grade 12, which the international

11

school would be.

12

I think it is one way for those embassies to

13

actually get to know ordinary American folk as we are

14

in this neighborhood.

15

neighborhood, say hello, and the neighborhood could

16

say, “Hello.”

17

that perhaps -- even though French and Chinese and

18

Spanish are not my language.

19

Swahili, and I doubt there will be a Swahili-speaking

20

embassy, though it would be wonderful.

21

be able to speak Swahili on a daily basis.

22

That they could then walk the

We could gain advantage from the fact

My language of fluency is

I would love to

I do think that the educational benefit of

Page 77

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

41

1

these chanceries is great for the neighborhood and for

2

the two schools.

3

Georgia Avenue we have the Takoma School, which is also

4

available.

5

language program, but I do want you to specifically

6

think about that.

And I don’t know anything about their

MR. BROWN:

7

It’s particularly interesting to

8

hear from people who have lived in this area a very

9

long time, with a perspective they bring to some of

10

these comments.

11

comment?

12

Yes.

Who’s next.

Do you have a

Yes, over here.
MR. WALKER:

My name is James Walker

13

(phonetic).

14

parents bought the house.

15

I’m a pharmacist and an attorney; Howard University was

16

very very good to me.

I’ve lived here since 1968, when my
I live on Whittier Place.

17

I think the city is missing a big opportunity.

18

As a pharmacist, I worked at Walter Reed army hospital,

19

it was the jewel of the army.

20

Page 78

And then, just on the other side of

The hospital is good.

The city needs a hospital and a med school.

21

Two things that could be done here.

22

back up as a hospital.

Open Walter Reed

It could be the new DC General.

19-1

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

42

As a pharmacist, like I said, I worked there

1
2

under Reagan, we got money.

3

Columbia Hospital for Women, so you’re down one

4

hospital.

5

Iraq, you need a hospital here in case something goes

6

wrong.

7

would help the entire city.

You are fighting two wars, Afghanistan and

This was a large hospital.

Opening it back up

The city has a law school over on Connecticut

8
9

You’ve already closed

Avenue.

You could put the medical school here in one

10

of the buildings and save a lot of money.

11

could send some of their kids here to go to school.

12

That’s my comment on the situation.
MR. BROWN:

13

Okay thank you.

Every ward

Thank you.
Someone else?

14

Who else have a comment you’d like to share for the

15

record?

16

Yes.

Back here.

MR. JEFF BROWN:

Thank you.
Hi.

My name is Jeff Brown

17

(phonetic).

I live in Shephard Park, right across the

18

street here.

19

have or other logistical, mechanical kinds of things

20

which I’m sure will be covered ad nauseam throughout

21

the process, I’m not sure what the mood of the

22

community is, but I wanted to express my excitement and

Aside from some minor concerns that I

Page 79

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

43

1

interest and enthusiasm about having an international

2

campus in our neighborhood, and having an international

3

community of diplomats as our neighbors.
I think, as was alluded to, were the

4
5

educational opportunities.

6

opportunity for us and for them.

7

host of that.

8

representation of Washington and what Washington

9

symbolizes as a Western capital.

I’m proud to be the

The community here is a great

To be able to have

10

that interaction, I cannot imagine really -- although

11

my personal preference of maybe letting the whole thing

12

go to seed is a better option than having a bunch of

13

embassies and foreign diplomates and foreign

14

international community in our neighborhood.
I just wanted to thank the State Department

15
16

and thank DC for bringing that opportunity to us.

17

anticipate they would be good neighbors and I look

18

forward to reciprocating that from our side.

19

you.

20

Page 80

I think it’s a great

MR. BROWN:

Thank you so much.

I

Thank

Is there

21

someone else who would like to make a statement or pose

22

questions?

If you have questions, those could be your

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

44

1

statement if you want to get questions on the record

2

you’d like responded to.

3

you want to share?

4

parent pulling their hand down.

Anyone else have something

Anyone else, who doesn’t have a

If we don’t have someone coming right now --

5
6

and again, I’ll wait just a second for you to think

7

about if you want to make a comment of whatever nature,

8

brief.

9

a bit of a recess, allow you to look at the boards

What we might do is take a few minutes and have

10

again, to make written comments if you want to.

11

need to keep the verbal comment part open until 8:30,

12

because that’s how we advertised.

13

at 8:00 and want to testify and we’ll be here for that.

People might come in

But let me just ask again, is there anybody

14
15

who has a public comment you want to make at this

16

point?

17

We

If not, what I want to suggest is that the

18

folks go back to the boards from the state department

19

and from the consultants who are here.

20

take about 15 minutes; you think if you have a

21

question, and we’ll call everyone back together in

22

about 15 minutes.

And that we

Page 81

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

45

1

(BRIEF RECESS)

2

MR. BROWN: I want to invite us to come back to

3

order here, briefly at least to see if there are other

4

comments anyone wants to make.

5

seat.

6

have more formal comments to be made.

Let’s check and see where we are and whether we

It seems that most who want to comment have

7
8

done so.

9

writing, both during that period and earlier.

Certainly, other comments have been made in
And I

10

know you’ve been having good conversations at the

11

boards.

12

there’s anybody who is here who has a comment you want

13

read into the record as part of the formal hearing.

14

But we want to offer one last time to see if

Is there anybody here who wants to make a

15

formal statement?

16

either so I think we may be at a point where the formal

17

part of the hearing is over.

18

if you want and continue to look at the boards.

19

you also should feel free to be dismissed.

20

Page 82

I invite you to take a

No one has contacted me about that

You can visit informally
But

The reporter will stay and I will stay and the

21

floor monitor will stay.

And we will keep the comment

22

period open in case someone comes in or somebody starts

Foreign Missions Center at the Former Walter Reed Army Medical Center

46

1

home and remember something they really want to say and

2

they can rush back.
We will keep it open until 8:30, but we’ll

3
4

assume here and consider the formal part of the

5

collective hearing concluded at this pint then, since

6

there are no other comments.
Of course, and I’ll say again, comments can be

7
8

received online or by mail through May 18th.

9

information is on your sheet here about how to make

10

ongoing comments.

11

another comment in writing if you want.

Or as we close now, you can make

Thank you so much.

12

All the

Some of us may remain, but

13

other, feel free to be dismissed from the formal

14

hearing.

15

(HEARING ADJOURNED)

16

Page 83

Responses to Substantive Comments on the SDEIS

47

CERTIFICATE OF NOTARY PUBLIC

I, LINDA GILES, the officer before whom the
foregoing public hearing was taken, do hereby certify
that the testimony that appears in the foregoing pages
was recorded by me and thereafter reduced to typewriting
under my direction; that said public hearing is a true
record of the proceedings.

_______________________
LINDA PATRICIA GILES
Transcriber/Notary
My D.C. commission expires:

Page 84

March 31, 2021

Appendix C

DRAFT - JULY 2017

/ SECTION 5
DESIGN GUIDELINES

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plans
EYP/

5-1

ROOFTOP
•
•
•
•

GARDEN
•
•
•
•
•

Function space
Quiet/reflective space
Storm water management
Landscape
Tree preservation

PRIVATE
•
•
•
•

Offices
Conference rooms
Private residence(s)
Structured parking (below)

Screened mechanical equipment
Communications equipment
Green roof (storm water management)
Renewable energy equipment

PUBLIC
•
•
•
•
•

Reception
Meeting spaces
Gallery and function space(s)
Service (i.e. Visa counter)
Deliveries

FORECOURT
•
•
•
•
•
•

Main façade - openness
Mission identity
Visitor parking
Security setback
Landscape
Storm water management

PERIMETER
•
•
•
•

Fence
Signage
Entrance gate(s)
Security structure

Figure 5.1: Chancery Typology

5-2

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Design Guidelines / 5

The entire U.S. Department of State’s Foreign Missions Center (FMC)
is located on a portion of the former Walter Reed Army Medical Center
(WRAMC) and within the boundary of the WRAMC Historic District in
Washington, DC. The DC State Historic Preservation Office (DC-SHPO)
is responsible for developing and enforcing guidelines related to construction
within listed historic districts. Guidelines developed and published by the DCHPO are referenced below in the sections on Guidelines for New Construction
and Guidelines for Existing Buildings. The guidelines developed specifically for
the Foreign Missions Center are to be utilized in addition to the DC SHPO
guidelines.
The intent of the design guidelines is to provide design parameters for lot
development such as frontage, building disposition, building height, parking
requirements, and lot access for both entry and service needs. Potential
massing diagrams, while defining a recommended coverage for site and open
space, shall also provide ways to break down scale of the buildings.
The Design Guidelines are arranged in nine sections. The sections focus on
Design Review and Approval Process, Campus Zones, General Guidelines for
Buildings and Structures, Guidelines for New Construction, Guidelines for
Existing Buildings, Vehicular Access and Parking, Sustainability, Open Space
and Landscape, and Utilities.
5.1 DESIGN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS

The U.S. Department of State (DOS) and foreign missions are required
to comply with federal environmental and historic preservation laws. As
part of the master planning effort, DOS has filed an Environmental Impact
Statement and recorded a Record of Decision as required per the National
Environmental Protection Act of 1969 (NEPA). DOS has also conducted a
Section 106 consultation pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act of
1966 (NHPA). The result of the Section 106 consultation is a Programmatic
Agreement negotiated and signed by DOS, Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation, DC State Historic Preservation Office, National Capital Planning
Commission, and other concurring parties.
Figure 5.2: Foreign Missions Center - Aerial View

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

The WRAMC is a historic district registered in the District of Columbia
Inventory of Historic Sites and is listed in the National Register of Historic
Places. The former WRAMC is also under the purview of the U.S.
Commission of Fine Arts (CFA). The DC State Historic Preservation Office
5-3

(DC-SHPO), U.S. Commission of Fine Arts (CFA), National Capital
Planning Commission (NCPC), and the District of Columbia municipal
agencies, including local Area Neighborhood Commissions (ANC), shall have
roles in the evaluation of each chancery design for substantial compliance with
local regulations and appropriate design response to the local and regional
context.

Foreign Mission’s Chancery
Design Submission

Area Neighborhood

The Office of Foreign Missions (OFM), an office within DOS, serves the
interests of the American public, the American diplomatic community abroad,
and the foreign diplomatic community residing in the United States ensuring
that all diplomatic benefits, privileges, and immunities would be properly
exercised in accordance with federal laws and international agreements. OFM
will assist foreign missions through the design review and approval process.

DC Agency Review
Total timeline for review = 6 months

Schedule review with NCPC within 90 days of submission

Commission

(DDOT, Planning, etc.)

Preservation Office

U.S. Commission of

Step 1 – Area Neighborhood Commissions

The Advisory Neighborhood Commissions (ANC) consider a wide range
of policies and programs affecting their neighborhoods, including traffic,
parking, recreation, street improvements, liquor licenses, zoning, economic
development, police protection, sanitation and trash collection, and the
District’s annual budget.

Fine Arts

Commission

5-4

Through a memorandum of agreement (MOA) that was signed on February
27, 2017, DOS and NCPC agreed that NCPC is authorized to review foreign
mission projects on land owned by the Federal government within the District
of Columbia. The MOA summarizes the roles and responsibilities of both
DOS and NCPC in the design review process. The requirements and criteria
established pursuant to 22 U.S.C. § 4306 (Locations of Foreign Missions in the
District of Columbia) section of the Foreign Missions Act apply to the design
review and approval process for chancery projects at the FMC.

DC - State Historic

National Capital Planning

Figure 5.3: FMBZA Review Process Flow Chart

National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC)

Action:
Not Disapprove
Disapprove

In each of these areas, the intent of the ANC legislation is to ensure input
from an advisory board that is made up of the residents of the neighborhoods
that are directly affected by government action. The ANCs are the body of
government with the closest official ties to the people in a neighborhood.
The ANCs present their positions and recommendations on issues to various
District government agencies, the Executive Branch, and the Council. They
also present testimony to independent agencies, boards, and commissions,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

usually under the rules of procedure specific to those entities. By law, the
ANCs may also present their positions to Federal agencies.
Foreign Missions are encouraged to consult with the ANC as early as possible
after a design project is initiated, as well as during the development of the
design. The boundaries of individual ANCs change from time to time, thus
OFM will ensure that the foreign mission has the most current information
concerning such matters.
OFM generally recommends that the above referenced consultations with the
ANC be substantially completed prior to beginning discussions with the CFA
or NCPC (Steps 3 and 4).
Step 2 - District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office

The District of Columbia’s State Historic Preservation Office (DC-SHPO) is
one of the preservation offices established in each state and territory under the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. DC-SHPO duties include historic
preservation planning, survey and identification of historic properties, public
education, review of government projects affecting historic properties, and
promotion of federal preservation tax incentives
Foreign Missions are encouraged to consult with the DC-SHPO staff as early
as possible after a design project is initiated, as well as during the development
of the design. DOS will assist the foreign mission with arranging such
consultations.
OFM generally recommends that the above referenced consultations with
DC-SHPO be substantially completed prior to beginning discussions with
the CFA and NCPC (Steps 3 and 4). OFM will advise and assist the foreign
mission with all such matters.
Step 3 – U.S. Commission of Fine Arts

Since 1910, the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts (CFA) has been responsible
for the design review of government properties in the National Capital. The
CFA reviews designs for federal and D.C. government buildings, monuments,
memorials, parks, and public spaces throughout the District of Columbia,
including the FMC.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

1. Applications submitted to CFA will be in the name of DOS, on behalf
of the foreign mission. Thus, consultation and coordination between
the foreign mission and OFM with respect to this matter is critical.
2. Foreign Missions are encouraged to consult with the CFA staff as
early as possible after a design project is initiated, as well as during the
development of the design. DOS will assist the foreign mission with
arranging such consultations.
3. Read the submission requirements for concept or final review as appropriate and prepare the necessary drawings and other materials for
the proposed project. These requirements are available on the CFA’s
website.
4. OFM will forward a submission for a concept or permit review, with
appropriate drawings showing existing conditions and proposed construction and other required submission materials, directly to CFA.
5. Upon receipt of the submissions, CFA staff may contact OFM or the
foreign mission to request additional or revised materials. If a proposed project is insufficiently documented for review, the CFA staff
may recommend that the review of the case be postponed until a later
CFA meeting.
6. Depending on the scope, size, prominence, and design of a proposed
project, it will either be reviewed by the Commission of Fine Arts in
its monthly public meeting, or reviewed by CFA staff and placed on
the Consent Calendar for approval by the CFA in its meeting. CFA
staff will notify applicants whose cases have been placed on the agenda
for the public meeting.
7. Smaller-scale or less complex projects may be placed on the Consent
Calendar of staff recommendations, which is subject to approval by
the CFA in its meeting.
8. Projects requiring review by the CFA in its public meeting must be
presented by the applicant or applicant’s representative at the CFA’s
meeting.
9. When a project is approved in concept, the applicant may proceed
to develop the project design and documentation in preparation for
a submission for final review. Concept approval is often accompanied by detailed recommendations or conditions, which the applicant
5-5

should incorporate into the design prior to making a submission for
final review.
10. Once a project receives final approval, applicants generally need not
return for further review unless changes are made to the approved
final design. Final approval may also be accompanied by detailed recommendations or conditions, which the applicant must incorporate
into the design documents prior to receiving full final approval.
Step 4 – National Capital Planning Commission

The National Capital Planning Act set forth at 40 U.S.C. §§8701 et seq.,
establishes the National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC) as the central
planning agency for the federal government in the National Capital Region
(NCR). The Act provides for the agency’s essential functions, including
development of a Comprehensive Plan for the NCR; review of federal
and some District of Columbia (DC) proposed developments and projects;
review of DC zoning amendments; annual review of the Federal Capital
Improvements Program and the DC Capital Improvements Program; and
the development of special planning projects. One of NCPC’s principal
responsibilities is to coordinate development activities of Federal and District
of Columbia agencies in the Region.
1. Foreign missions shall consult the NCPC staff as early as possible after
a design project is initiated, as well as during the development of the
design. DOS will assist the foreign mission with arranging such consultations.
2. Schematic Development submissions are required where size, complexity, and/or projected impacts of proposed projects (including site
improvements and commemorative works) necessitate early NCPC
guidance prior to the expenditure of substantial funds for more detailed project design. In cases involving complex planning and development proposals, the Executive Director may require schematic
development submissions.
o

5-6

Where issues relate to the potential suitability of a proposed site,
the Executive Director may require that schematic development
proposals accompany the location and program submission. Any
sponsoring agency may choose to make a schematic development

submission to solicit the Commission’s views prior to preparation
of preliminary plans.
3. With certain exceptions, preliminary submissions must be made for all
new construction or renovation projects after tentative design decisions have been made but well before detailed design work begin, typically at the 20 to 25 percent development stage. Timely submissions
of preliminary plans are vital to avoid costly revisions in later detailed
design stages.
4. If major changes are made in either the design or program of a proposed development after the NCPC has reviewed a preliminary submission, a revised preliminary plans for review shall be submitted as
far in advance of completion and submission of final plans as possible,
except where such changes have been made specifically in response to
NCPC recommendations on the preliminary submission. Preliminary
submissions may take the form of:
o

Preliminary site and building plans for projects involving
both building construction or renovation and related site
improvements;

o

Preliminary building plans for projects involving additions or
renovation where no site improvements are involved;

o

Preliminary site development plans for projects involving only
site improvements; and

o

Preliminary designs for all commemorative works proposals. In
cases in which the proposed commemorative works involve only
site improvements, including sculpture, content requirements
for preliminary site development plans apply. Where proposed
commemorative works include substantial structures, content
requirements for preliminary site and building plans apply.

5. Final submissions must follow preliminary submissions, after design
decisions have been made (including building and landscaping materials), typically at the 60 to 70 percent development stage, and prior to
advertisement and award of construction contracts.
6. NCPC will ensure prompt scheduling of a chancery application as an
action item on the NCPC’s agenda within 90 to 95 days of receipt of

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

a completed application submitted on or before the Submission deadline established by the Commission for a particular meeting.
7. NCPC will conduct informal proceedings for all chancery applications. The proceedings shall focus on a staff presentation articulating
the Executive Director’s position on an application. This process
shall include no direct testimony and no cross examination although
NCPC may direct questions to the foreign mission or the foreign mission may speak if it so desires. Further, hearings shall include public
participation by those members of the public who express an interest
in speaking or submitting written comments.
Any determination concerning a chancery project at the FMC shall be
based on the following criteria:
a. The international obligation of the United States to facilitate
the provision of adequate and secure facilities for foreign missions in the Nation’s Capital;
b. Historic preservation, as determined by NCPC, in carrying
out this responsibility; and in order to ensure compatibility
with historic landmarks and districts, substantial compliance
with District of Columbia and Federal regulations governing
historic preservation shall be required with respect to new
construction and to demolition of or alteration of historic
landmarks;
c. The adequacy of off-street or other parking and the extent
to which the area will be served by public transportation to
reduce parking requirements, subject to such special security
requirements as may be determined by the Secretary of State,
after consultation with Federal agencies authorized to perform
protective services;

8. NCPC shall render a final decision to “not disapprove” or “approve”
a chancery application no later than six (6) months after the date a
completed application is files. The Commission’s determination shall
not be subject to the administrative proceedings of any other agency
of official except as may be provided by the FMA.
Foreign missions may not lawfully deviate from final plans approved by
the NCPC under these provisions. Therefore foreign missions are urged to
resolve all outstanding planning and design issues with affected agencies and
organizations prior to the submission of final site and building plans.
If substantial changes must be made in final plans after NCPC has taken action
on them but prior to construction, foreign missions are required to submit
revised final plans for NCPC review and action.
Role of Other Agency Review

Pursuant to 22 U.S.C. § 4306 (e) and (j), the following agencies may have
active roles in the design review and recommendations for approval of the
replacement, or expansion of chanceries on the FMC.
• National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC)
• U.S. Commission of Fine Arts (CFA)
• DC State Historic Preservation Office (DC-SHPO)
• DC Municipal Agencies and local ANC

d. The extent to which the area is capable of being adequately
protected, as determined by the Secretary, after consultation
with Federal agencies authorized to perform protective services;
e. The municipal interest as determined by the Mayor of the
District of Columbia; and
f.

The Federal interest, as determined by OFM on behalf of the
Secretary of State.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-7

Figure 5.4: Foreign Missions Center - Campus Zones

5-8

N

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

5.2
CHAPEL ZONE

Area around Memorial Chapel consists of lots that abut Alaska Avenue. Lot occupancy is typically a single building.

General Character: Low to medium density buildings that transition from Dahlia Street
to adjacent residential street.
Building Placement: Shallow Setbacks, buildings oriented to street defining a street wall,
Deep Vegative Buffer at Alaska Avenue
Defining Features: Dense tree coverage, open corner at Chapel
Typical Building Height: No more than 3 Stories
Type of Civic Space: 14th Street, Dahlia Street, Vegetative Buffer

DAHLIA STREET ZONE

Urban street consists of lots that abut Dahlia Street. Lot occupancy
is typically a single building.

General Character: Medium density buildings forming a uniform street wall, trees
within right-of-way, and highest pedestrian activity.
Building Placement: Shallow Setbacks, buildings oriented to street defining a street wall
Defining Features: Tree coverage and steep slopes west of 14th St, Greater density
of development east of 14th St, Legacy placemaking (axial
relationships and open space)
Typical Building Height: 2 to 4 Stories
Type of Civic Space: Dahlia Street, Views of Chapel

MAIN DRIVE ZONE

Chancery compound consists of large lots with single or multiple
buildings. These lots are located along Main Drive.

General Character: Single or multiple buildings on landscaped open area, preservation
of elements and features of natural landscape.
Building Placement: Variable Setbacks
Defining Features: Deep setbacks from Main Drive, Preserve character of ellipse,
Preserve tree coverage along 16th St.
Typical Building Height: 3 to 4 Stories
Type of Civic Space: Main Drive, Ellipse

CAMPUS ZONES

The FMC campus is divided into three zones, the Chapel Zone, the Dahlia
Street Zone and the Main Drive Zone. Each zone reflects a different character
and series of guidelines for development and each parcel or lot on the site can
be categorized within one of these character zones.

5.3 GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

The FMC Master Plan proposes a general pattern of building heights and lot
coverage where there is a relatively uniform height across the campus and the
densest development is north of Dahlia Street. In addition to the guidelines
below, foreign missions shall be substantially compliant with DC Zoning
regulations and NCPC Comprehensive Plan standards.
Density and Scale

The scale and massing of the developments within the FMC, while suiting
the specific needs of the foreign missions, are expected to work within
a framework complementary to the adjacent developments within the
WRAMC historic district and surrounding residential neighborhoods. The
drawing to the right articulates density zones for low- to mid-rise construction
as well as a low rise campus zone, creating a unified sense of place and
flexibility as well as accommodating and complementing the surrounding
neighborhood. The intent of the density and scale is to minimize the effects
of new construction on neighboring areas adjacent to campus.
The proposed limitations below follow the density and scale concept
forwarded in the FMC Master Plan. The building height limit equals all
occupiable floors (excluding mechanical penthouses) and shall be measured
from the average grade five feet beyond the perimeter of the structure.
Roof top Elements

Table 5.1: Foreign Missions Center - Campus Zones

Rooftop elements such as parapets, mechanical penthouses, exhaust stacks,
communications equipment, and other non-occupiable roof elements shall be
carefully designed to ensure architectural compatibility and to minimize their
visual impact.
Mechanical and elevator penthouses shall create visually attractive roofscapes
and rooflines for the WRAMC Historic District. These elements shall be

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-9

integrated into the architectural expression of the building, and can be
articulated as an attic story or hidden within the roof form of the structure. All
rooftop equipment shall be screened from view using materials consistent with
the major building facades.
Installation of rooftop communications equipment, including satellite and
microwave dishes, shall be carefully considered for location and visual impact.
Communications equipment shall be installed at the lowest possible elevation
above the roofline, and screened to the extent practicable from public view.
Communications equipment shall be set back as far as possible from all edges
of the roof (20 feet at a minimum). Rooftop communications equipment,
which cannot be screened, should be placed in association with penthouse
structures so as to avoid the appearance of a freestanding object on the roof.
Antenna and mounting materials shall be unobtrusive and of a color that
blends with surrounding structures.
Building Setbacks

On a campus-wide basis, the Master Plan proposes a general pattern of primary
and secondary frontage setbacks of buildings from streets in order to create
sense of space on the street. Setbacks from side lots and rear lots are proposed
to clearly delineate each chancery.
Definitions for frontage elements
Primary Frontage

This is the front or street address of each lot. Primary access to the chancery
shall to be from the primary frontage. For development the hierarchy of the
streets are as follows:
• Dahlia Street –primary
• Main Drive - primary
• 14th Street – secondary, other than potentially lots that have corner or
dual frontage.

Figure 5.5: Foreign Missions Center - Massing and Scale Diagram

5-10

N

In coordination with the adjacent developments within the WRAMC Historic
District, Dahlia Street and Main Drive each have unique characters. Dahlia
Street east of 14th Street is a street with a more urban character. Buildings
along Dahlia Street are located close to the sidewalk and as near to each other
as possible to create wall of buildings to the street. Main Drive shall have more
park-like character with buildings setback from the street and open lawn areas.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Corner Lots

On corner lots, the frontage shall be both the primary street and secondary
street. The formal entrance to the chancery can be from either or both streets.
Private Frontage

Figure 5.6: Fence Photo

Private Frontage is the area between the lot line at the street and the primary
façade of the building. This area is important as it is part of the development
within the context of the WRAMC Historic District and surrounding
neighborhoods. Buildings shall present an accessible appearance at the ground
level. . Private frontage elements and building entries shall be oriented to the
primary street address. Blank walls without fenestration shall be avoided. For
additional guidelines about private frontage and security elements, refer to the
sections NCPC Comprehensive Plan that address Urban Design Elements and
Foreign Missions and International Organizations Elements.
Fence

A fence at the frontage or property line maintains street spatial definition.
A fence is optional and not required. The purpose of a fence is to provide a
physical barrier while maintaining visibility of the chancery façade and primary
entrance. As a physical barrier, a fence may aid in securing the chancery
lot. The maximum height for a fence shall be no greater than 3 meters
(approximately nine feet and nine inches (9’-9”)) above the adjacent final
finish grade of the sidewalk. Security fences may surround the entire lot. The
fence shall be open and finished with a dark color.

Security Structure

A small outbuilding or annex for protecting security personnel from the
weather (gatehouse) or as a dedicated screening facility for visitors is permitted
within the private frontage. This structure shall be designed for a minimal
footprint and height.
Flag Poles

Flag poles are allowed within the private frontage of each chancery lot. The
flag pole(s) shall be setback at least ten (10) feet (3050 mm) from the property
line. The maximum height of the flag pole(s) is 24 feet (7300 mm).
Foreign Mission’s Public Art

Each Foreign Mission may choose to use public art as a representative
expression. Foreign Mission’s public art shall be limited to one work within
the private frontage. The location and size of the art shall be subject to the
review and approval process.
Exterior and Building Signage

One sign identifying the foreign mission is permitted for each lot. The
location, size, and illumination of exterior signage shall be subject to the
review and approval process.. Building signage shall be limited to directional
elements.

Low walls not higher than 0.8 meters (approximately 2’-8”) above the finish
grade may be included in the overall height of the fence.
Screen Walls

Figure 5.7: Signage Photo

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

A screen wall may be within the private frontage of a lot. However, it shall
be setback a minimum of 20 feet (6100 mm) from the property line. The
use of screen walls shall be limited to screen service functions such as loading
area, and solid waste storage, from both the public frontage and adjacent
lots. Evergreen landscape elements may be used instead of a screen wall.
The primary element(s) concealed by a screen wall are trash dumpsters. The
maximum height of the screen wall shall not be greater than the height of
a four (4) to six (6) yard dumpster plus one (1) foot above the adjacent final
finish grade. Screen walls must be setback at least 20 feet (6100 mm) from the
frontage line and ten feet (3050 mm) from side and rear lot lines.

5-11

5.4 GUIDELINES FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS

In the District of Columbia projects that involve historic properties or historic
districts are governed by D.C. Law 2-144- Historic Landmark and Historic
District Protection Act of 1978. Pursuant to the requirements of 22 U.S.C. §
4306, the review process for chancery development projects in the FMC will
be evaluated in a manner that is similar to the handling of projects elsewhere
in the District. The design guidelines and principles that have been established
by the DC Historic Preservation Office are utilized by the review agencies
noted in Section 5.1 for these projects and will be applicable to projects at the
FMC. More information regarding the design guidelines developed by the DC
Historic Preservation Office can be found on their website (http://planning.
dc.gov/DC/Planning/Historic+Preservation).
Figure 5.8: Screen Wall Photo

Preservation Standards

In general most design guidelines related to historic buildings or historic
districts in the United States utilize the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards
for the Treatment of Historic Properties as their foundation. Of the four types
of treatment identified in the Standards, Rehabilitation is the one that is most
relevant to the modification and reuse of a historic building. The following
Guidelines for Rehabilitation are provided in the document Introduction to the
Historic Preservation Guidelines issued by the DC Historic Preservation Office.
These standards should be utilized as an initial outline when evaluating the
potential reuse of one of the historic buildings:
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use
that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building
and its site and environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The
removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place,
and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such
as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
4. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.

5-12

5. Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of
craftsmanship that characterize a historic property shall be preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where
the severity of deterioration requires replacement of distinctive features,
the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other
visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence.
7. Chemical and physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage
to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if
appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
8. Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected
and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures
shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not
destroy the historical materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
The DC Historic Preservation Office also publishes guidelines related to
specific types of projects, including additions to historic buildings and new
construction in historic districts. The following paragraph from the District of
Columbia Historic Preservation Guidelines outlines the acceptable approach to
designing an addition to a historic building:
Additions to historic buildings are sometimes necessary to extend their
functional or economic life. It is important to consider the affect that the
addition’s location, size and exterior appearance will have on an existing
building. When deciding where to locate an addition, its visibility from
a public right-of way, the importance of the elevation to which it is
attached and the affect it will have on then overall form and character
of a historic building should be carefully considered. The height, width,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

proportions, rhythm of windows and doors, roof shape, ornamentation,
projections and materials of the addition all contribute to its appearance.
They should be compatible with, but need not exactly copy, the character
of the historic building.
Historic Buildings

The Master Plan for the FMC identifies three buildings on the DOS portion
of the WRAMC Historic District suitable for reuse as a chancery or in
support of the foreign missions community. All three have been identified
as contributing resources to the historic district. Each building has also been
evaluated for its role in the development of the U.S. Army’s medical sciences
and the buildings architectural character within the context of the historic
district. Building 57 (Memorial Chapel) will be renovated by DOS for use in
support of the foreign mission community. The following are brief synopsis of
the history of the three buildings and the character defining features that shall
be recognized in a renovation.

Figure 5.9: Foreign Missions Center - Historic Resources Diagram

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

N

5-13

Building 40- Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR)

Building 40 consists of three components constructed under different building
campaigns. The south wing was constructed in 1923, the center and north
wings in 1932 and the west wing in 1962. Originally constructed to house the
Army Medical School, it was designated as WRAIR in 1955. Many of the
important medical advances associated with the WRAMC were researched in
this building complex. The portions of this building built during the period
of significant are considered a contributing resource to the WRAMC historic
district. Building 40 can also be recognized for its critical role in the history of
the WRAMC and as an excellent example of Georgian Revival architecture
that contributes to the coherence of the campus and the historic district.
Building Character Defining Features

• Brick façade with limestone trim
• Low-slope roof behind parapet
• Three primary entries with decorative detailing (south, north and east
elevations)
• Punched window openings

Figure 5.10: Isometric View of Building 40

Figure 5.11: Building 40A Entrance

Figure 5.12: Building 40 Entrance

Figure 5.13: Building 40B Entrance

• Axial relationship with Building 1 (Main Hospital) to the east
Site Character Defining Features

• Maintain plane of east façade as it faces Building 1
• Maintain open area between Building 1, Building 40 and Building 41
(underground, structured parking is permitted)

5-14

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Building 41- Red Cross Building

The first section of Building 41 (facing Dahlia Street) was constructed in 1927;
a solarium was added on the south side in 1944. Building 41 was the location
for many social and recreational functions for the patients at WRAMC,
including performances by visiting entertainers. Building 41 is considered a
contributing resource to the WRAMC historic district. Building 41 can also
be recognized due to its association with the development of the post and as
a significant example of the Colonial Revival style which contributes to the
overall campus and the historic district.
Character Defining Features

• Brick façade with limestone detailing
• Pitched roofs with projecting cornices
• Main entry on north elevation
• Symmetrical layout of north elevation
Site Character Defining Features
Figure 5.14: Building 41 North Elevation

Figure 5.16: Building 41 Interior

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

Figure 5.15: Building 41 South Elevation (c. 1928)
prior to the solarium addition

• Maintain massing of Building 41 relative to Buildings 1 and 40
• Maintain open area between Building 1, Building 40 and Building 41
(underground, structured parking with green roof is permitted). This
area was historically a formal garden with planting beds arranged in
symmetrical patterns.

Figure 5.17: Building 41 West Elevation of
1944, solarium addition
5-15

Building 57- Memorial Chapel

Completed in 1931, Memorial Chapel was constructed with donations raised
by the Red Cross’ Gray Lady Corps, a group that provided recreational
services at military and veterans’ hospitals. The Chapel is built in the English
Country Gothic style which differs greatly from the Georgian Revival style
of the rest of the campus. Its original use was as a non-denominational
worship space for the WRAMC patients, staff, visitors, and the surrounding
neighborhoods. The Chapel was de-consecrated by the Army in 2011 as
part of the base closure process. Building 57 is considered a contributing
resource to the WRAMC historic district. Building 57 can also be recognized
as a significant example of the English Country Gothic Revival style which
contributes to the overall campus and the historic district. In addition to the
exterior, the main assembly space (nave, choir and alter areas) have retained
the architectural character of the Gothic Revival style.
Character Defining Features

• Stone façade with limestone trim
• Traditional massing of an English Country Church with a high-pitched
roof, buttressed side walls and an articulated tower.

Figure 5.xx: Building 57 - Postcard from 1940’s

Figure 5.11: Building 57 Entrance

Figure 5.12: Building 57 - Detail

Figure 5.13: Building 57 Interior

Site Character Defining Features

• Maintain the alignments of Dahlia Street and 14th Street and massing as
viewed from the south and east (intersection of Dahlia and 14th Streets)
• Maintain the sloped open space to the south and east of the Chapel as
landscaped areas

5-16

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

5.5

GUIDELINES FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION

In the District of Columbia construction projects that involve historic
properties or historic districts listed on the DC Inventory of Historic Sites
are governed by D.C. Law 2-144 Historic Landmark and Historic District
Protection Act of 1978. The following paragraph from the District of
Columbia Historic Preservation Guidelines addresses the acceptable approach
for the design of new construction in a historic district. More information
regarding the design guidelines developed by the DC Historic Preservation
Office can be found on their website (http://planning.dc.gov/DC/Planning/
Historic+Preservation).
• New construction in historic districts should follow the same general
principles as additions to historic buildings. New buildings in historic
districts should be compatible with the character of the district and
neighboring buildings without exactly duplicating a historic style or
architectural period. Attention should be paid to the new building’s
location, particularly its setback and how it aligns with the front
facades of neighboring buildings. In addition, attention should be paid
to the new building’s height, width, proportions, rhythm of doors
and windows, roof shape, ornamentation, projections as well as the
landscaping of the property.
Pursuant to 22 U.S.C. § 4306 (g), foreign missions are required to comply
substantially with District of Columbia building and related codes in a manner
determined by the Secretary to be not inconsistent with the international
obligations of the United States.

• Limit the use of the following exterior materials: Reflective metal
finishes, exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS), and reflective glass.
Select building materials that are compatible with the existing buildings
within the historic district;
• Refer to District of Columbia Historic Preservation Guidelines for New
Construction in Historic Districts for additional considerations.
Development Sites Related to Existing Historic Properties

The Master Plan for the FMC has identified two historic buildings that will
be renovated and reused if an appropriate partner can be identified to execute
a project. If reuse of these buildings is not viable the redevelopment of these
sites will include the following specific design guidelines for new construction.
In addition, one historic building will be renovated and used by DOS for the
foreign mission community.
Alterations and/or additons should be designed and integrated into the historic
fabric with minimal impact to the existing architecture.
All work will be designed and executed in a manner that minimizes damage to
or removal of character-defining features or significant fabric of the building,
structure, or setting.
All exterior work will be executed in a manner that minimizes damage to
significant landscapes or site features adjacent to the building or structure.

Architectural Character

New construction shall be visually compatible with the architectural character
of the WRAMC historic district. To make new construction visually
compatible with the character of the WRAMC historic district, it shall
employ similar materials and colors that are already found on the campus. The
following consideration shall be made when selecting a palette of exterior
building materials.
• Develop an exterior color palette that complements the range of colors
predominant on the WRAMC campus, such as brick red, dark or slate
gray (found in roofing tiles), gray-colored stone, and trim colors in cream
and white;

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-17

Building 40- Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR)

• The WRAIR was located on the western portion of the campus with
a distinct relationship to the original hospital building (Building 1) both
aesthetically and in plan. New construction on this site will need to
maintain and reinforce that existing relationship.
• The east-west axial relationship between the Hospital and the WRAIR
will be retained. The east façade of the new construction on the Building
40 site will respond architecturally to the existing axial arrangement with
Building 1/Main Hospital.
• The east end of the WRAIR, consisting of the two laboratory wings
and the entrance to the auditorium section creates a forecourt to the
WRAIR that mirrors the west end of the Hospital. New construction on
the WRAIR site will retain the building edge defined by the west facades
of the laboratory wings and will be articulated to retain the idea of a
forecourt. The center portion of this façade, the current entrance to the
auditorium, will include an architectural element that serves the purpose
of anchoring the west end of the formal axis with the hospital building.
• The massing of new construction on the WRAIR site will be simple
volumes with low slope roofs.

Figure 5.18: Building 40 East Elevation (c. 1955)

Facade of
Bldg 40

Approx. location of
flag pole, terminus
of axis

Open landscape
south of Bldg 41
Existing steep
slope, landscaped

Figure 5.19: Building 41 Lot Diagram

5-18

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Building 41- Old Red Cross Building

• The Old Red Cross Building was located with a primary formal entrance
façade to the north on Dahlia Street. This façade is symmetrical with the
entry centered on the façade. New construction on this site will retain a
primary entrance facing Dahlia Street. The entrance will be a focal point
of an articulated façade that utilizes massing and proportion to develop a
street level scale.
• The south face of the Red Cross Building, both in its original
construction and after the solarium addition, helped frame a formal
landscape that was edged by the Building 1/Main Hospital to the east,
the WRAIR to the west and the Red Cross Building to the north. The
south façade of new construction on this site shall retain the edge defined
by the south façade of the Red Cross Building, either before or after
construction of the solarium. The design of this façade will be compatible
with the other buildings framing the open area.

Figure 5.20: Aerial view of western portion of WRAMC campus (c. 1955). Building 41 is at the center of
image with Building 40 to the left, Building 1 to the right, and Buildings 52, 53, and 54 above.

• The landscape design for the open area south of the Red Cross Building
will reinforce both the east-west axis between the Hospital and the
Building 40 site and the north-south axis centered on the Building 41
site. The landscape will be limited to low elements that do not block the
visual connection between the three buildings and sites.

Figure 5.21: Building 40 East Elevation with Open Space in foreground on the right is the Solarium wing
of Building 41 (c. 1948).

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-19

Building 57 – Memorial Chapel

• The Memorial Chapel is located on the western portion of the campus
with a distinct relationship to remnant native forest landscape west of 14th
Street aesthetically and in plan. Site improvements and landscape on this
site will maintain and reinforce that relationship.
• The open lawn area to the south and east of Memorial Chapel enhance
the overall setting of the building and the visual impact of the massing,
entrances, and bell tower. Site improvements shall maintain the open
areas between 14th and Dahlia Streets and the south and east elevations
of the Memorial Chapel.
• The north and west elevations of Memorial Chapel are somewhat
concealed by the mature landscape and topography. While site
improvements and potential additions may be necessary for the change
in use of the building, the concealing features of the landscape and site
topography shall be maintained.
Figure 5.22: Building 57 at its dedication (c. 1938).

Figure 5.23: Building 57 Southeast Elevation with Open Space in foreground (c. 1948).

5-20

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

5.6 SITE DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABILITY

In compliance with Federal Executive Orders, DOS has established several
goals for its agency Sustainability Plan. The overall focus of these goals is the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions through reduction of energy intensity
and use of renewable energy, reduction in potable water usage, and green
design. These goals can translate into sustainable building and site development
options that DOS shall encourage each foreign mission to explore where
technically feasible. In addition, new construction and renovations shall be
substantially compliant with local building codes and green building standards
that promote sustainability.
The basic goals of sustainable design are to reduce consumption of nonrenewable resources, minimize waste, and create healthy, productive
environments. There is additional focus to ensure new and renovated
infrastructure maximizes energy efficiency while enhancing opportunities for
the use of renewable energy sources. Any work completed to improve energy
efficiency in the historic buildings or achieve other sustainability goals will
follow the Secretary of the Interior’s Illustrated Guidelines on Sustainability for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (2011).
Open Space and Landscape

The landscape character for the FMC lots guide foreign missions
towards developing a standard for the beautification, maintenance and
sustainability with the site. Site landscape character should substantially
address recommendations and regulations from the Districts adopted
Zoning Amendments (Title 11-Zoning of DC Municipal Regulations).
These regulations set clear goals for creative and affective sustainable site
development measures. These measures include:
• Pervious Surfaces – Title 11, Subtitle C, Chapter 5: This section
establishes minimum pervious area requirements for each lot based on lot
size and not zoning designation.
• Surface Parking Lot Landscape – Title 11, Subtitle C, Chapter 7, Section
715: This section of the zoning text sets a minimum area of 10 percent of
any surface parking lot to be dedicated to planting.
Figure 5.24: Foreign Missions Center - Critical Root-zones of Heritage Trees Diagram

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

N

• Green Area Ratio (GAR) – Title 11, Subtitle C, Chapter 6: This chapter
establishes an increase in the quantity and quality of environmental
performance of the urban landscape. The GAR sets integrated
5-21

environmental requirements for landscape elements and site design that
contribute to the reduction of storm water runoff, the improvement of
air quality, and the mitigation of the urban heat island effect.
The site provides valuable landscapes in the District that provide habitats and
biodiversity for plant and animal species. Future development should build on
this legacy by creating landscapes and ecosystems that are restorative, visually
appealing, biologically diverse, and ecologically sound. Opportunities to
achieve these goals lie in the integration of green roofs, green infrastructure,
landscape plantings, and support of the District’s biodiversity initiatives. The
habitat and biodiversity principles seek to create valuable landscapes and
ecosystems that are restorative, visually appealing, and enhance community
character, while being functional, maintainable, biologically diverse and
ecologically sound. Reduce impervious surfaces to mitigate urban heat island
effects. The intent of FMC is to include biodiversity and native species in
landscape planting design.
Tree Preservation

Site plans shall take into consideration existing Heritage Trees and Special Trees
in their respective layouts and provide ample root volume to adequately
preserve theses existing trees. These trees will be identified for the foreign
missions by DOS. Heritage Trees are defined by DC Municipal Regulations
as any tree 100 inches (2540 mm) or greater in circumference, which is
equivalent to 31.85 inches (790 mm) in diameter measured at 4.5 feet (1372
mm) above grade. These mature trees and associated dense canopy are mostly
found west of 14th Street. Buildings, structures and paved areas should be
placed with the existing trees in mind to not only preserve the tree, but obtain
the greatest value from the existing canopy and other positive attributes.
Heritage Trees and their associated critical root-zone (CR-Z) will be
identified by DOS via a certified arborist for each foreign mission’s lot. It is
recommended that each site plan take creative measures that work towards
the preservation of existing Heritage Trees where possible. Some examples
of these creative measures include planning configurations and cantilevered
building areas to avoid CR-Z, atriums or courtyards that allow existing trees
to live within the built environment, and site planning and cantilevered and/
or platform walkways and driveways to avoid CR-Z. Foreign missions are
strongly encouraged to obtain a Heritage Tree Removal Permit through the
DC Urban Forestry Administration (UFA).
Any Heritage Tree that will have disturbance within its CRZ should have
its own tree protection program devised by a certified arborist per DDOT
5-22

regulations. This protection program will, in detail, spell out the strategy for
pruning/ treating the tree during and after construction. Heritage Trees which
are not able to be preserved should require a thorough explanation as to why
(i.e. detrimental to a functional layout, failing condition, etc.) provided as part
of the design review process.
Special Trees are between 44 inches (1118 mm) and 100 inches (2540 mm)
in circumference, which is equivalent to 14.00 inches (355 mm) and 31.85
inches (790 mm) in diameter measured at 4.5 feet (1372 mm) above grade.
The removal of Special Trees on private property typically require a permit.
Foreign missions are strongly encouraged to obtain a Special Tree Removal
Permit through the DC UFA. DCMR Chapter 24-37 for Special Trees
provides direction for replacement trees when a Special Tree or Heritage Tree
is removed. These regulations stipulate the replacement of a Special Tree or
Heritage Tree with a number of saplings on minimal size whose aggregate
circumference equal or exceeds the circumference of the tree to be removed.
DOS encourages substantial compliance by the foreign missions with these
local regulations.
Plant Materials

Foreign missions shall integrate native vegetation into the landscape elements
of their parcel. The size of trees, shrubs, and plant beds shall be considered
with respect to their scale relationship to the chancery buildings, roads, and
open spaces. There shall be a hierarchy of plantings, ranging from large
tree and shrub massing along roads and entries, down to small garden scale
plantings and floral display beds in courtyards and pedestrian gathering areas.
Plants can also serve to punctuate and reduce the scale of stairs, walls, terraces,
and building facades, through the use of hanging, twining, or climbing plants,
which can help the buildings and spaces become part of the landscape. Plants
shall be used to soften the edges of buildings, paths, and outdoor areas with
flowers.
Plants selected for use by foreign missions on the FMC campus shall possess
appropriately long-lived characteristics, and have visual traits that offer refined
intrinsic beauty to reflect the enduring quality of the campus. The overall
design of each foreign mission planting should seek to complement the
existing natural and surrounding plantings.
Selection and placement of plant materials shall be made in accordance with
lighting and security issues to avoid obscuring views and creating hard to see
places.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

TYPICAL 2 ACRE PARCEL

Storm water Management (SWM)

The site-wide FMC property shall be designed in substantial accordance with
District Department of the Environment (DDOE) regulation. DOS shall
provide a storm water management plan for common areas of the property
which meets DDOE requirements, in order to avoid off parcel storm water
improvements for individual foreign missions, as well as to meet stewardship
goals of LEED and local development. Individual parcel shall provide DDOE
compliant storm water management plan for improvements within their
parcel, which:

35,000 SF FOOTPRINT
87,000 SF GFA
3,400 CF GREEN ROOF

7,000 SF CONCEPT
SWM FACILITY

• Preserved trees on individual parcels will not be permitted to account for
the site-wide infrastructure parcel;

NEW IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE

• The existing site at meadow conditions (2-year design) would consist of
an average runoff Curve Number (CN) of 72, or 0.9 inches (23 mm) of
runoff matching the overall site composite.

POTENTIAL BMP LOCATIONS
INDIVIDUAL PARCEL DEFINITION

1,250 CF GREEN ROOF

8,000 SF FOOTPRINT
22,000 SF GFA

TYPICAL 1/2 ACRE PARCEL

3,000 SF CONCEPT SWM FACILITY

1,250 CF GREEN ROOF

13,000 SF FOOTPRINT
43,500 SF GFA

TYPICAL 1 ACRE PARCEL

NEW IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE

• Reduce storm water run-off through low-impact development principles
and techniques that enhance the green and open space of the campus.

• The existing site at pre-project (15-year design) would consist of an
average CN of 85, or 3.5 inches (89 mm) of runoff matching the overall
site composite.
• The existing site at pre-project (100-year design) would consist of an
average CN of 85, or 6.5 inches (165 mm) of runoff matching the overall
site composite.

1,000 SF CONCEPT
SWM FACILITY

NEW IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE

POTENTIAL BMP LOCATIONS

POTENTIAL BMP LOCATIONS

INDIVIDUAL PARCEL DEFINITION

INDIVIDUAL PARCEL DEFINITION

The above criteria shall be used regardless of the exact existing conditions
of any individual parcel in order to ensure the campus will always remain in
compliance with DDOE guidelines for total site.
Foreign missions are encouraged to incorporate rain gardens into their
landscaping to enhance their storm water management strategies.
Foreign missions are encouraged to maximize ground infiltration by increasing
open space and using permeable pavement and structural pavement systems
that allow for water and oxygen absorption to improve vegetative root
growth.

Figure 5.25: Foreign Missions Center - Stormwater Management Conceptual Lot Coverages Diagrams

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-23

Sustainable Buildings

Energy reduction through targeting at least 30 percent energy performance
improvements over current ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1. Energy
performance improvements can be achieved through several measures
including high performance exterior envelopes, selection of heating and
cooling systems, improved access to daylight, improved individual control of
thermal comfort and lighting, and use of renewable energy sources.
Improve access to daylight and exterior views for occupants through shallow
floor plates, increased building perimeter, exterior and interior permanent
shading devices, and high performance glazing.
Water Use Efficiency and Management

Building water use can be reduced through the selection of water efficient
fixtures and equipment. Alternative on-site sources of water such as rainwater
and sink waste water can be used for non-potable applications such as toilet
flushing.
Site water use can be reduced through selection of native or regionally adapted
plant materials that require little to no irrigation. If irrigation is required,
greywater systems could be used to limit or eliminate the use of potable water
for irrigation.

Drip irrigation systems and native plantings requiring little moisture should be
used to reduce water demands for parks and landscaped areas.
Infrastructure leak-detection technology and accurate metering should be used
to reduce overall water consumption.
Pollution Prevention and Waste Reduction

Public transportation such as Metrobus and Metrorail and alternative
transportation such as bicycles provide safe means to travel to and from the
campus while limiting greenhouse gas emissions and reducing built area
needed to accommodate staff parking needs.
Building solid waste (trash) may be reduced through changes in work patterns
that limit the use of consumable materials. Provisions for recycling of materials
can further reduce solid waste when consumable materials are used.
Renewable Energy

The use of on-site renewable sources such as photovoltaic arrays and windmills
should be investigated.
In non-critical areas, lighting should integrate photovoltaics to reduce cabling
requirements and promote the use of clean energy.
Other sources of renewable energy may be available through local utility
providers such as tri-gen plant being proposed for the WRAMC-LRA
redevelopment.
Materials and Waste Principles

Waste is becoming an increasingly important issue for cities to manage
more efficiently. City waste is transported significant distances before being
treated or finally disposed. Waste can be categorized into two classifications:
construction waste and operational waste (day-to-day life of a city).
The materials and waste operations principles seek to make a substantial
contribution to the principle of eliminating the “concept of waste” through
good design, emphasizing source reduction, reuse, recycling and composting.

Figure 5.26: Example of Renewable Energy Element

5-24

Foreign missions shall create a waste diversion plan to avoid landfills and/
or incineration. Foreign missions are encouraged to utilize green building
practices that encourage the efficient use of recycled and recyclable materials.
Further, foreign missions are encouraged to use low impact, low embodied
energy materials for buildings and infrastructure, as well as products made of
wood that are certified as harvested from sustainably managed forests.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Alternate Transportation

Emissions from vehicles are a significant generator of air pollution in urban
locations such as Washington, DC. In addition, vehicular traffic congestion
affects the quality of living for both the occupants of the cars and the
neighborhoods that they travel through. Utilizing public transportation and
alternative means of transportation, such as bicycles, will reduce vehicular trips
and have a positive impact on the environment.
The District has recognized these positive impacts on the city in recent
changes to the DC Zoning regulations. Mitigation measures such as providing
financial support for employees using public transportation, providing electric
vehicle charging stations, and providing bicycle parking and washroom
facilities.
Each chancery shall substantially meet the minimum DC Zoning requirements
for bicycle parking and shower and changing facilities. Sustainability standards,
such as LEED, mandate greater capacity for bicycle storage and support
facilities than local regulations.
Short-term Bicycle Parking:

Figure 5.27: Exterior Bicycle Storage

• Minimum 1 space per each 40,000 GSF,
• Locate on chancery lot within 120 feet of a primary entrance,
• Bicycle racks, lighting and paving shall conform to requirements in DC
Zoning Regulations.
Long-term Bicycle Parking:
• Minimum 1 space per each 5,000 GSF,
• Locate within chancery building or structured parking,
• Bicycle room, Bicycle racks or locker, and access shall conform to
requirements in DC Zoning Regulations,
• Provide changing rooms with showers and lockers to support employees
who use alternative means of transportation. Refer to DC Zoning for
minimum requirements.

Figure 5.28: Interior Bicycle Storage

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-25

5.7

12'
LOADING
SURFACE
PARKING

TO STRUCTURED
PARKING BELOW

VEHICULAR ACCESS AND PARKING

Access and employee parking are important elements of the design guidelines.
Instead of providing prescriptive requirements for parking, these design
guidelines shall allow each foreign mission to address the parking and service
access needs via a Transportation Demand Management Plan (TDM). The
TDM shall be submitted to DDOT for review and shall be included as part of
the project review and approval process.
Access Drive

12'

LOADING

TO STRUCTURED
PARKING BELOW

SURFACE
PARKING

Figure 5.29: Lot Access with Two Entrances

20'

Each lot shall have at least one (1) but not more than two (2) access drives to
the abutting public street on which the lot fronts. Single lane access drives shall
not exceed 12 feet (3700 mm) in width at the lot line. Two lane access drives
shall not exceed 20 feet (6100 mm) in width at the lot line. All access drives
shall meet the elevations of curbs, gutters and roadways. Locate access points
requiring a curb cut a sufficient distance (not less than 33 feet (10100 mm))
from any street intersection so as not to disrupt traffic flow.
• Each chancery shall have at least one vehicular entry per lot;
• Two vehicular entries shall be allowed on larger lots;
• Curb cut must have minimum three (3) feet (1000 mm) radius and
maximum six (6) feet (2000 mm) radius.

LOADING
SURFACE
PARKING

TURED
BELOW

20'

TO STRUCTURED
PARKING BELOW

The design of access driveways shall be provided with adequate sight distances
and turn-around areas for trucks within the access drive and substantially
conform to DC Zoning and DDOT requirements. On-street loading and
deliveries shall not be permitted. At least one off-street loading space shall
be provided for each lot. Minimize the width of service or garage entrances
on street frontages and make use of architectural treatments, such as specialty
doors and gates, to mitigate the visual impact. Loading areas and associated
turn-around zones shall be separated from employee and visitor vehicles access
areas. DC Zoning provides standards for loading berths and service/delivery
spaces, including quantity, location, size and layout, screening, and support/
ancillary functions.

Figure 5.30: Lot Access with One Entrance

5-26

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Transportation Impact and Parking Strategies

DOS is committed to providing a sustainable campus with the development
of each chancery parcel within the FMC. A Transportation Demand
Management (TDM) strategy and plan shall be required of each foreign
mission. The implementation of TDM strategies for each parcel shall be
dependent on the needs and policies of each foreign mission that develops
parcels for chanceries within the FMC.

• If it is anticipated that the chancery may be used for the occasional,
special event, TDM studies shall include recommendations for event
parking strategies.

The goal of the TDM is to encourage chanceries within the FMC to reduce
vehicle trips to and from the FMC. Due to the unique needs of each chancery,
TDM elements shall be developed with each foreign mission as the chancery
sites are designed to best meet the chancery and lot development needs.
These individual TDM elements shall require all chanceries to provide a
Transportation Management Plan to be reviewed by DDOT during chancery
design.
• Each foreign mission shall submit a Transportation Demand Management
(TDM) plan as part of the design review and approval process. The TDM
plan will be reviewed and commented upon by DDOT;
• Each foreign mission shall meet 100 percent of its parking needs within
its lot at time of occupancy and at 10 years after occupancy;
• All staff parking shall be in underground, structured parking (n.b. at
Buildings 20 and 56, at grade parking is available if the structures are
reused);
• Limited visitor parking (4 to 6 parking spaces) may be provided as surface
parking on each chancery lot. Locate surface parking to side or rear of
building and screen from street;
• Public and alternative transportation elements are available to each
foreign mission to offset staff, visitor, and event parking needs. The
public transportation elements include Metrobus and Metrorail. The
alternative transportation elements pedestrian, bicycle, and carpooling.
TDM planning shall strongly consider the utilization of public and
alternative transportation elements for chancery staff to offset on-site
parking needs. DC Zoning provides standards for minimum long term
and short term bicycle parking and associated shower and locker facilities;
• TDM studies shall also include regularly scheduled deliveries (i.e. office
supplies, special package deliveries, postal service, and event catering) and
waste removal;
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-27

5.8 UTILITIES

DOS will be developing the site infrastructure as well as stub-out connections
to a point beyond the road network to individual parcels, in order to assure
availability to those parcels at the time of development without disruption or
damage to site-wide infrastructure.
The following services shall be available at each parcel:

• Water Supply (potable and fire protection) – DC Water and Sewer
Authority
• Natural Gas – Washington Gas
• Electrical Power – PEPCO (Exelon) or local micro-grid
• Telecommunications – Verizon et al.
• Sanitary Sewer – DC Water and Sewer Authority (DC Water)
• Storm Drainage Network – DC Department of Energy and Environment
(DCDOE)
Each foreign mission shall be responsible for providing adequate information
to DOS satisfying the guidelines and recommendations for all utility systems,
including permit plans, capacity and demand calculations, and outfall locations
so that DOS may determine the feasibility of each with regard to system and
stub out capacity. Final connection and permitting requirements for utility
vendors for individual parcels is the responsibility of the foreign mission.

Figure 5.31: Foreign Missions Center - Typical Street Section Indicating Approximate Locations of in Street Utilities

5-28

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-29

CHAPEL ZONE
Building Height
Principal Building

40 feet max. (3 stories)

Annex Building

30 feet max. (2 stories)

Lot Occupation
Building Coverage

25% max.

Lot Coverage

35% max.

Setbacks
A.1 Front Setback

10 feet, min.

A.2 Sideyard Setback

50 feet, min.

A.3 Sideyard Setback
A.4 Rearyard Setback

10 feet, min.

A.5 Alaska Ave Buffer

50 feet from existing fence

(primary frontage)

(except 50 feet min. @ Dahlia St)

(at 14th Street alignment))

15 feet, min.

Lot Character & Improvements

Lot 1

• Tree preservation critical

• Buildings face internal streets

• Maintain buffer at Alaska
• Preserve presence of Chapel
Lot 2

Parking Provisions

Lot 3

Staff Parking

Provide TDM Plan

Visitor/Surface Parking

4 to 6 spaces

Loading

1 max.

Chapel

LEGEND
FMC Property Line
Parcel Line
Setback
Primary Facade
Vehicular Entrance
Open Space at Lots
Heritage and Special Trees
Steep Slope

Figure 5.32: Foreign Missions Center - Chapel Zone Setbacks Diagram

5-30

N

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Figure 1A:

Lot 1 development options
1 building - 25% building coverage

Figure 1B:

Lot 1 development options
2 buildings - 25% building coverage

Figure 2A:

Lot 2 development options
25% building coverage

Figure 3A:

Lot 3 development options
25% building coverage

Figure 3B:

Lot 3 development options
25% buiding coverage

Figure 4:

Chapel development options
13% existing building coverage

Figure 5.33: Foreign Missions Center - Chapel Zone Lot Diagrams

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

N

5-31

DAHLIA STREET ZONE (west of 14th Street)
Building Height
Principal Building

48 feet max. (4 stories)
32 feet, min. (2 stories)

Annex Building

30 feet max. (2 stories)

Lot Occupation
Building Coverage

See plan

Lot Coverage

10% more, see plan

Setbacks
B.1 Front Setback

40 feet, min.

B.2 Front Setback

20 feet, min.

B.3 Sideyard Setback

10 feet, min.

B.4 Rearyard Setback

20 feet, min.

B.5 Alaska Ave Buffer

50 feet from existing fence

(primary frontage)

(except 15 feet min. @ corner of Dahlia and 14th
Streets)

(secondary frontage)

Lot Character & Improvements
• Tree preservation critical

• Buildings face internal streets

• Maintain buffer at Alaska
• Preserve presence of Chapel

Parking Provisions

Lot 6
Lot 5
1 Bldg = 15% max.
2 Bldgs = 20% max.

1 Bldg = 25% max.
2 Bldgs = 25% max.

Staff Parking

Provide TDM Plan

Visitor/Surface Parking

4 to 6 spaces

Loading

1 max.

Lot 7
1 Bldg = 30% max.
2 Bldgs = 30% max.

LEGEND
FMC Property Line
Parcel Line
Setback
Primary Facade
Vehicular Entrance
Open Space at Lots
Heritage and Special Trees
Steep Slope

Figure 5.34: Foreign Missions Center -Dahlia Street (west) Zone Setbacks Diagram

5-32

N

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Figure 5A:

Lot 5 development options
1 building - 15% building coverage

Figure 5B:

Lot 5 development options
2 buildings - 20% building coverage

Figure 6A:

Lot 6 development options
2 buildings - 25% building coverage

Figure 6A:

Lot 6 development options
1 building - 25% building coverage

Figure 7A:

Lot 7 development options
1 building - 25% building coverage

Figure 7B:

Lot 7 development options
1 building - 30% building coverage

Figure 5.35: Foreign Missions Center -Dahlia Street (west) Zone LotDiagrams

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

N

5-33

DAHLIA STREET ZONE (east of 14th Street)
Building Height
Principal Building

48 feet max. (4 stories)
32 feet, min. (2 stories)

Annex Building

30 feet max. (2 stories)

Lot Occupation
Building Coverage

30% max. for 1 building
40% max. for 2 buildings

Lot Coverage

40% max for 1 building
50% max. for 2 buildings.

Setbacks
C.1 Front Setback

15 feet, min.

Front Setback

20 feet, min.

(primary frontage)

C.2

(secondary frontage)

C.3 Sideyard Setback

10 feet, min.

C.4 Rearyard Setback

20 feet, min.

Lot Character & Improvements
• Create new open space
south of Building 41

• Buildings face internal streets

• Preserve axial relationship
between Bldg 1 & Bldg 40
Lot 8

Lot 9

Lot 10

Lot 11

Parking Provisions
Staff Parking

Provide TDM Plan

Visitor/Surface Parking

4 to 6 spaces

Loading

1 max.

LEGEND
FMC Property Line
Parcel Line
Setback
Primary Facade
Vehicular Entrance
Open Space at Lots
Heritage and Special Trees
Steep Slope

N

Figure 5.36: Foreign Missions Center - Dahlia Street (east) Zone Setbacks Diagram

5-34

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Figure 8A:

Lot 8a development options
Existing Building 40 (20% building coverage)

Figure 10A: Lot 10 development options
1 building - 30% building coverage

Figure 8B:

Lot 8 development options
1 building - 30% building coverage

Figure 10B: Lot 10 development options
2 buildings - 40% building coverage

Figure 8C:

Lot 8 development options
2 buildings - 40% building coverage

Figure 11A: Lot 11 development options
Existing Building 41 (30% building coverage)

N

Figure 5.37: Foreign Missions Center - Dahlia Street (east) Zone Lot Diagrams

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-35

MAIN DRIVE ZONE (west of 14th Street)
Building Height
Principal Building

56 feet max. (4 stories)
40 feet, min. (3 stories)

Annex Building

30 feet max. (2 stories)

Lot Occupation
Building Coverage

See plan

Lot Coverage

10% more, see plan

Setbacks
D.1 Front Setback

20 feet, min.

D.2 Front Setback

20 feet, min.

D.3 Sideyard Setback
D.4 Rearyard Setback

20 feet, min.

D.5 DOS Easement
D.6 16th Street Buffer

15 feet

(primary frontage)

(secondary frontage)

20 feet, min.
10 feet from property line

Lot Character & Improvements
• Tree preservation critical

• Buildings face Main Drive

• Maintain buffer at 16th St

• Buildings on Lot 7 to have
secondary face at 16th St

• Preserve presence of ellipse

Parking Provisions

Lot 13
Lot 12

1 Bldg = 15% max.

1 Bldg = 15% max.
2 Bldgs = 20% max.

Staff Parking

Provide TDM Plan

Visitor/Surface Parking

6 to 10 spaces

Loading

2 max.

LEGEND
FMC Property Line
Parcel Line
Setback
Primary Facade
Vehicular Entrance
Open Space at Lots
Heritage and Special Trees
Steep Slope

N

Figure 5.38: Foreign Missions Center - Main Drive (west) Zone Setbacks Diagram

5-36

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Figure 12A: Lot 12 development options
1 building - 15% building coverage

Figure 12B: Lot 12 development options
2 buildings - 20% building coverage

Figure 12C: Lot 12 alternate development options
2 buildings - 20% building coverage

Figure 12D: Lot 12 development options
1 building - 15% building coverage

Figure 13A: Lot 13 development options
15% building coverage

Figure 13B: Lot 13 alternate development options
15% building coverage

N

Figure 5.39: Foreign Missions Center - Main Drive (west) Zone Lot Diagrams

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-37

MAIN DRIVE ZONE (east of 14th Street)
Building Height
Principal Building

56 feet max. (4 stories)
40 feet, min. (3 stories)

Annex Building

32 feet max. (2 stories)

Lot Occupation
Building Coverage

See plan

Lot Coverage

10% more, see plan

Setbacks
D.1 Front Setback

20 feet, min.

D.2 Front Setback

20 feet, min.

D.3 Sideyard Setback
D.4 Rearyard Setback

20 feet, min.

D.5 DOS Easement

15 feet

(primary frontage)

(secondary frontage)

20 feet, min.

Lot Character & Improvements

Lot 15

30% max.

• Create new open space
south of Building 41

• Buildings face Main Drive

• Preserve axial relationship
between Bldg 1 & Bldg 40

• Open lawn in setback from
Main Drive

Parking Provisions

(existing 26%)

Lot 14

20% max.

Staff Parking

Provide TDM Plan

Visitor/Surface Parking

6 to 10 spaces

Loading

2 max.

(existing 15%)

LEGEND
FMC Property Line
Parcel Line
Setback
Primary Facade
Vehicular Entrance
Open Space at Lots
Heritage and Special Trees
Steep Slope

N

Figure 5.40: Foreign Missions Center - Main Drive (east) Zone Setbacks Diagram

5-38

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

DRAFT - JULY 2017

Figure 14A: Lot 14 development options
Existing Building 20 (15% building coverage)

Figure 14B: Lot 14 development option
20% building coverage

Figure 15A: Lot 15 development options
20% building coverage

Figure 15B: Lot 15 development options
30% building coverage

Figure 15C: Lot 15 development options
Existing Building 32 (26% building coverage)

N

Figure 5.41: Foreign Missions Center - Main Drive (east) Zone Setbacks Diagram

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

5-39

This Page is Intentionally Left Blank

5-40

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Foreign Missions Center Master Plan
EYP/

Appendix D

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of State,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office,
the National Capital Planning Commission, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Development, Implementation, and Maintenance of a
Foreign Missions Center
Within the Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District
Washington, District of Columbia
WHEREAS, the Foreign Missions Act of 1982 (22 U.S.C. 4301-4316 as amended)
(“FMA”) establishes that the operation in the United States of foreign missions and
public international organizations and the official missions to such organizations,
including the permissible scope of their activities is a proper subject for the exercise of
Federal jurisdiction; and
WHEREAS, in furtherance of the FMA, the head of any Federal agency may transfer or
loan any property to, and perform administrative and technical support functions and
services for the operations of the Department of State (“DOS”); and
WHEREAS, the FMA permits the Secretary of State to acquire property in the United
States for the purpose of implementing exchanges of property intended for diplomatic or
consular uses between the Government of the United States and the government of a
foreign country; and
WHEREAS, a foreign mission is any mission to or agency or entity in the US which is
involved in the diplomatic, consular or other activities of, or which is substantially owned
or effectively controlled by a foreign government, or an organization representing a
territory or political entity which has been granted diplomatic or other official privileges
and immunities under the laws of the US or which engages in some aspect of the conduct
of international affairs of such territory or political entity, including any real property of
such a mission and including the personnel of such a mission; and
WHEREAS, the term “chancery” in this context means the principal offices of a foreign
mission (as defined in the FMA) used for diplomatic or related purposes, and any
annexes to these offices or support facilities, and includes the site and any buildings on
the site; and
WHEREAS, the DOS proposes the establishment of a Foreign Missions Center (“FMC”)
on approximately 31.7 acres of the former Walter Reed Army Medical Center
(“WRAMC”) site at 16th Street NW, between Main Drive and Fern Street, in order to
manage the FMC, including maintaining common areas; develop a Master Plan; develop

Page 1 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88

design guidelines; and lease land to foreign governments for the purpose of constructing
and operating new chancery facilities (“Project”); and
WHEREAS, the DOS plans to carry out this Project in accordance with the FMA,
thereby making the Project an undertaking subject to review under Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (“NHPA”), 54 U.S.C. § 300101 et seq., and its
implementing regulations, 36 CFR Part 800; and
WHEREAS, on November 6, 2015 the DOS accepted the transfer of 31.7 acres of land
of the former WRAMC from the Department of the Army (“Army”); and
WHEREAS, after administrative jurisdiction for the FMC was transferred from the
Army to the DOS, the DOS Office of Foreign Missions (“OFM”) hired a contractor to
oversee site maintenance and operations; and
WHEREAS, the DOS has defined the Area of Potential Effect (“APE”) of this
undertaking for the aboveground historic resources is comprised of the entire former
WRAMC and an area extending approximately 1,250 feet (four city blocks) to the north
and west, extends into Rock Creek Park along 16th Street NW, is bounded to the north by
Hemlock Street NW, until the intersection with 13 th Street NW, east of 13th Street NW it
is bounded by Fern Street NW to Georgia Avenue to the east and Aspen Street to the
south, as shown in Appendix 1; and
WHEREAS, the DOS has determined that the undertaking will have an adverse effect on
identified historic properties (Appendix 2), which are contributing elements to the
WRAMC Historic District, and has consulted with the District of Columbia Historic
Preservation Office (DCHPO) which functions as the State Historic Preservation Office
for the District of Columbia, pursuant to 36 CFR Part 800; and
WHEREAS, interested members of the public have been provided opportunities to
comment on identification of historic properties through public meetings and information
provided on the internet and the opportunity to comment on the effects this undertaking
will have on historic properties at WRAMC; and
WHEREAS, the DOS consulted with the DCHPO to conclude there are no federally
recognized tribes in the District, Maryland, or Virginia that reasonably have documented
ties to lands associated with WRAMC, nor are there any tribes who have been relocated
to a different area that reasonably have documented ties to lands associated with
WRAMC; and
WHEREAS, the DOS, in consultation with the DCHPO, has invited Advisory
Neighborhood Commission 4A, Advisory Neighborhood Commission 4B, the District
Administrator’s Office, the Alliance to Preserve the Civil War Defenses of Washington,
the Brightwood Community Association, the Committee of 100 on the Federal City, the

Page 2 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132

D.C. Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development, the D.C.
Preservation League, the D.C. Office of Planning, the National Park Service - Rock
Creek Park, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Shepherd Park Citizens
Association, the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts, the Ward 4 D.C. Council Member, and
the Walter Reed Society to be consulting parties in this PA; and
WHEREAS, the National Capital Planning Commission (“NCPC”) is the body charged
under the Planning Act (40 U.S.C. at § 8722) with the review of the Master Plan and any
amendments to it; and
WHEREAS, the DOS and the NCPC have entered into a Memorandum of Agreement
(“MOA”) dated February 27, 2017, attached as Appendix 3, outlining the review process
for the development of individual chancery sites within the FMC, authorizing NCPC to
review projects on land at the FMC from a planning and zoning perspective and pursuant
to the FMA; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with the MOA, NCPC has been designated an Invited
Signatory to this agreement; and
WHEREAS, in accordance with 36 CFR § 800.6(a)(1), the DOS has notified the
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (“ACHP”) of its adverse effect determination,
providing the specified documentation, and the ACHP has chosen to participate in the
consultation pursuant to 36 CFR § 800.6(a)(1)(iii); and
WHEREAS, the Army submitted an Application for Historic Landmark or Historic
District Designation concurrently with a National Register of Historic Places (“NRHP”)
nomination for the WRAMC Historic District to the District of Columbia Historic
Preservation Review Board, which serves as the State Review Board for the District of
Columbia, and this application was approved on April 24, 2014 placing the Historic
District on the DC Inventory of Historic Sites, and subsequently added the NRHP; and
WHEREAS, the Army completed an existing conditions report based upon the
architectural inventory of historic properties present at the former WRAMC, and took
photographs of each principal façade of each eligible building and select copies (floor
plans, facades, roof plans, details of character-defining features) of as-built drawings for
each historic building which were provided to DOS upon transfer; and
WHEREAS, the Army completed a Phase IA Archaeological Assessment - Archival
Investigation (“Archival Investigation”) on the entire former WRAMC to determine what
past land disturbance activities had been conducted there that could affect the
preservation of archaeological remains, and collected and analyzed oral and documentary
history sources describing locations where prehistoric or Civil War-related artifacts have
been previously found at WRAMC utilizing Army and non-Army records; and

Page 3 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175

WHEREAS, the DOS has completed a Phase 1A Geoarchaeology Survey to complete
the Phase IA Archaeological Assessment for the FMC including subsurface inspection of
the project area in order to characterize the potential for archaeological resources that
would need to be considered during the evaluation of proposed project effects, and intact
soils with the potential to contain cultural material in the upper profile were identified
throughout the NW quadrant and the central portion of the SW quadrant of the 31.7 acres
transferred to the DOS; and
WHEREAS, the DOS has initiated a Phase 1B archaeological study in undisturbed NW
and SW quadrant areas where construction or other surface disturbance will or may take
place; and
WHEREAS, the DOS will retain control of and responsibility for the ongoing
maintenance of the Memorial Chapel (Building 57); that the building will not be leased to
a foreign mission, and will be open to the public on a regular basis; and
WHEREAS, the DOS has performed a comprehensive survey of the existing trees within
the boundaries of the FMC, and through the survey have identified all “special” and
“heritage” trees as defined by the Urban Forestry Division (UFD) of the District
Department of Transportation; and
WHEREAS, the DOS has developed Design Guidelines with input from the NCPC, the
U.S. Commission of Fine Arts, and the DCHPO, that will be utilized for both the Campus
(public space) Development and Lot Development of the FMC; and
NOW, THEREFORE, the DOS, the DCHPO, the NCPC and the ACHP agree the
undertaking shall be implemented in accordance with the following stipulations in order
to take into account the effects of the undertaking on historic properties.
Stipulations
The DOS shall ensure the following measures are carried out:
I.

SITE MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
A.

Historic Building Maintenance Requirements
1.
The DOS shall avoid adverse effects to historic properties between
the property transfer date from the Army and leasing of a parcel to a
foreign government by including the following measures in contracting
instruments for its interim maintenance agreements for identified historic
properties:

Page 4 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214

2.
Maintain the integrity of the exterior building envelopes as it exists
at the time of the official transfer of the property.
3.
Provide historic properties with fire protection utilizing systems
that are operational at the time of the official transfer.
4.

Prevent undue historic building deterioration by:
a)
Maintaining air circulation and ventilation with operational
ventilation systems at the time of the official transfer.
b)
Keeping interiors of buildings with operational climate
control systems, at temperatures between 55 and 85 degrees
Fahrenheit.
c)

Providing pest control as needed.

5.
Conduct weekly interior and exterior inspections, looking for signs
of loss of integrity by damage from weather, physical security breaches, or
undue facility deterioration.
6.
Should damage (where the property retains its ability to convey its
significance) occur to the character-defining features of any historic
property, to structural components, or to features that would interfere with
compliance with subsections 1, 2, and 3 above, the DOS shall notify the
DCHPO of the damage and repair historic properties to the existing
condition on the effective date of the transfer of the property between the
Army and DOS based upon the WRAMC existing conditions document
(received at transfer from the Army) and additional documentation
developed at the time of the official transfer. Repairs shall follow the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Rehabilitation of Historic
Properties (Rehabilitation Standards).
7.
Should damage (where the property loses its ability to convey its
significance) occur, the DOS shall immediately notify the DCHPO and
develop a mitigation plan.
8.

Removal of Non-Character-Defining Features

Page 5 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
257
258

a)
Prior to historic property leasing, the DOS, in consultation
with the DCHPO, shall ensure adherence to the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties
(“Treatment Standards”) in the removal of non-character-defining
features associated with historic properties.
b)
The DOS shall take all precautions not to damage historic
fabric and shall repair surfaces to ensure preservation of historic
materials.
c)
Non-character-defining features may consist of, but are not
limited to, artwork, plaques, memorials, building numbers,
architectural lettering, time capsules and architectural signage.
B.

C.

Site Maintenance Requirements
1.

The on-site contractor is responsible for maintaining the state of
the buildings and addressing potential issues; operations and
maintenance of the building systems and utilities; landscaping; and
snow removal. In addition, the DOS Facilities Management
Services (“A/OPR/FMS”) section maintains the campus and serves
as the contracting officer’s representative.

2.

During infrastructure development, OFM will continue to maintain
a contractor on-site for operations and maintenance, while
contracting out for the demolition, construction, installation, and
other infrastructure activities related to the development of the
campus. OFM, its contractors, and A/OPR/FMS (and its subcontractors) will be responsible for waste removal and recycling on
the DOS property associated with its activities and operation.

Archaeological Identification and Treatment
1.

General
a)
Any archaeological investigations conducted by the DOS
shall utilize consultants meeting the Secretary of the Interior’s
“ARCHEOLOGY AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION: Secretary
of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines [As Amended and
Annotated]” (“Professional Qualifications”), and follow the
DCHPO’s 1998 “Guidelines for Conducting Archaeological
Investigations in the District of Columbia” (as amended) available
on the DCHPO website for reporting, collections curation, and
records curation.

Page 6 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

259
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
267
268
269
270
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
285
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
293
294
295
296
297
298
299
300
301

b)
The DOS is responsible for conducting phased
archaeological investigations after the property transfer from the
Army. DOS has completed a Phase 1A Geoarchaeological
Investigation and submitted a Memorandum of Findings (August
2016). Future sequential phases of investigations are comprised of:
Phase IB archaeological testing, and Phase II evaluation testing
(described below in paragraphs 2 and 3). Not all phases of
investigations may be merited and the necessity of the subsequent
phases will be determined based on results of each successive
phase, in consultation with the DCHPO. A work plan for each
phase of investigation will be submitted to the DCHPO for review
and comment before work commences. The phases may be
combined into fewer studies to reduce the number of work plans
and reports produced and submitted for review. Reporting for each
phase may be individual or combined to produce fewer reports. A
state site form and Determinations of Eligibility (“DOE”) will be
produced for each resource identified during the phased
investigations.
c)
All resulting artifact collections, images, field notes,
records, digital data, and geospatial data generated by the
archaeological investigations pursuant to this PA will be curated
by the DOS in accordance with 36 CFR Part 79.
d)
Should the DOS lease any parcel to a foreign government
prior to completion of any investigation in this stipulation, the
DOS shall ensure that it will have unencumbered site access to
complete historic property identification efforts as a condition of
the lease.
2.

Phase IB Archaeological Testing
a)
At the completion of the Phase IB archaeological testing
investigation, a report of findings and recommendations for future
work shall be prepared, as well as a state site form, as necessary.
The report shall be submitted to the DCHPO for a 30 calendar-day
period of review and comment prior to completion of the
document.
b)
The final report shall be distributed to all consulting parties,
except the ACHP, to this agreement.

Page 7 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

302
303
304
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
317
318
319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339
340
341
342
343
344
345

3.

Phase II Evaluation Testing
a)
The DOS shall conduct a Phase II evaluation testing of
archaeological sites identified during the Phase IB investigations if
features or reasonably intact cultural soil horizons are present. The
Phase II evaluation testing strategy, including unit types and
placement, will be determined in consultation with the DCHPO. A
work plan for the investigation will be submitted to the DCHPO
for review and comment prior to commencement of the study.
b)
At the completion of the Phase II evaluation testing
investigation, a report of findings, GIS survey data, amended site
forms, and DOEs will be prepared. The report shall be submitted to
the DCHPO for a 30 calendar-day period of review and comment
prior to completion of the document.
c)
The final report shall be distributed to all consulting parties,
except the ACHP, to this PA.

4.

Treatment
a)
Archaeological sites that are identified as ineligible for the
NRHP shall not merit further treatment or protection by the DOS.
b)
Sites that retain integrity as reported in the Phase II
evaluation testing and so reported in a DOE shall be treated by the
DOS as being eligible for the NRHP.
c)
If National Register eligible contributing archaeological
resources are identified, the DOS shall submit to the DCHPO an
amendment to the NRHP nomination for the WRAMC Historic
District that includes any archaeological resources determined to
be eligible for the National Register independently or as a
contributing resource.

D.

Caretaker Status for Chanceries
1.
In the event that a foreign government relinquishes an established
lease of an identified historic property back to DOS after a chancery is
established, DOS shall avoid adverse effects to such buildings prior to
lease of any parcel to another foreign government by including the
following measures in contracting instruments for its interim maintenance
agreements using those requirements in accordance with Stipulation I(A):

Page 8 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

346
347
348
349
350
351
352
353
354
355
356
357
358
359
360
361
362
363
364
365
366
367
368
369
370
371
372
373
374
375
376
377
378
379
380
381
382
383
384
385
386
387
388

a)
Maintain the integrity of the exterior building envelope as it
exists at the time DOS assumes responsibility for the property.
b)
Provide buildings with physical security and fire protection
utilizing systems that are operational at the time DOS assumes
responsibility for the property.
c)

Prevent undue historic building deterioration by:
(1)
Maintaining air circulation and ventilation with
operational ventilation systems at the time DOS assumes
responsibility for the property.
(2)
Keeping interiors of buildings with operational
climate control systems at time DOS assumes responsibility
for the property, at temperatures between 55 and 85 degrees
Fahrenheit.
(3)

Providing pest control as needed.

d)
Conduct weekly/monthly interior and exterior inspections,
looking for signs of loss of integrity by damage from weather,
physical security breaches, or undue facility deterioration.
e)
II.

Report any damage and repairs in the Annual Report.

INFRASTRUCTURE AND SITE DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
A. DOS shall provide the Consulting Parties, except the ACHP, notice by email, and
phone if necessary, to determine the Consulting Parties’ interests in participating
(hereafter referred to as Interested Parties) in the development of the
infrastructure and site plan design. No response within 14 calendar days shall be
understood to mean that the party is not interested in participating in the
development of the design and they will not receive any additional information
concerning the infrastructure and site plan design.
B. DOS shall provide the Interested Parties a review package of the infrastructure
and site plan design by email, and hard copy if requested, at the “Concept” level
and 65 percent complete;
a. DOS shall provide the Interested Parties a 30 calendar day opportunity to
review and comment by email on the design;

Page 9 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

389
390
391
392
393
394
395
396
397
398
399
400
401
402
403
404
405
406
407
408
409
410
411
412
413
414
415
416
417
418
419
420
421
422
423
424
425
426
427
428
429
430
431
432

b. DOS shall consider all comments received within the 30 calendar day
review period in developing the final design;
c. No response by an Interested Party within 30 calendar days shall be
understood to mean that the Interested Party does not have any concerns or
comments on the design;
C. DOS shall distribute a copy of the final (100 percent complete) infrastructure and
site plan design to the Interested Parties by mail within 14 calendar days of
finalizing. This will be provided for information only.
III.

CHANCERY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
A. Application for Chancery Development
a. Within 14 calendar days of receiving notice from a Foreign Mission on the
development of an application for chancery development, and in the spirit
of Stipulation C(1)(a) of the MOA, DOS shall provide the Consulting
Parties; except the ACHP; notice by email, and phone if necessary, to
determine the Consulting Parties’ interests in participating (hereafter
referred to as Interested Parties) in the subject application for chancery
development. No response within 14 calendar days shall be understood to
mean that the party, except for the NCPC, is not interested in the
application for chancery development and they will not receive any
additional information concerning the subject application.
b. DOS shall continually consult with the Foreign Mission on the application
for chancery development to ensure it complies with the Design
Guidelines incorporated into the DOS Master Plan for the FMC.
c. DOS shall work with NCPC in accordance with Stipulation C(1)(c) of the
MOA to determine the level of review (e.g., concept, preliminary, final or
combined preliminary and final) within 30 calendar days receiving notice
from a Foreign Mission on an application for chancery application.
d. Within 14 calendar days of finalizing the level of review with NCPC,
DOS shall notify by email the Interested Parties on the outline of the
agreed upon level of review for the subject application for chancery
development.
e. DOS shall provide the Interested Parties the agreed upon level of review
by email, and hard copy if requested, within 30 calendar days of receipt
from the Foreign Mission;

Page 10 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

433
434
435
436
437
438
439
440
441
442
443
444
445
446
447
448
449
450
451
452
453
454
455
456
457
458
459
460
461
462
463
464
465
466
467
468
469
470
471
472
473
474
475
476

i. DOS shall provide the Interested Parties a 15 calendar day
opportunity to review and comment by email on the level of
review;
ii. DOS shall consider all comments received within the 15 calendar
day review period and provide them to the Foreign Mission;
iii. No response by an Interested Party within 15 calendar days shall
be understood to mean that the Interested Party does not have any
concerns or comments on the level of review;
f. DOS shall notify Interested Parties, within 5 calendar days by email, of
submitting a final application for chancery development to NCPC.
g. NCPC shall notify Interested Parties, within 5 calendar days by email, of
when an application has been scheduled for the NCPC agenda.
h. NCPC shall notify Interested Parties, within 5 calendar days by email,
when it has referred an application for chancery development to the DOS,
the D.C. Office of Planning, and the D.C. Department of Transportation,
to include any other government agencies as may be appropriate, in
accordance with Stipulation C(2)(c) of the MOA.
i. Interested Parties have the opportunity to provide NCPC with
comments regarding the subject application in writing within 55
days once notified by NCPC.
i. NCPC shall notify Interested Parties, within 5 calendar days by email, of
publishing the NCPC’s final agenda regarding the subject application.
i. Interested parties may participate in the informal proceeding,
required by Stipulation C(2)(e) of the MOA, as long as they
address the requirements of the FMA (22 U.S.C. § 4306(d)(1)-(6)).
j. DOS shall notify Interested Parties of NCPC’s final decision to “not
disapprove” or “disapprove” an application of chancery development,
within 5 calendar days
B.

Archaeological Assessment Activities
1.

Appropriate stipulations shall be included in individual lease
agreements based on the findings of the archaeological
assessments conducted by the DOS.

Page 11 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

477
478
479
480
481
482
483
484
485
486
487
488
489
490
491
492
493
494
495
496
497
498
499
500
501
502
503
504
505
506
507
508
509
510
511
512
513
514
515
516
517
518
519

C.

Environmental Remediation
1.
In the event that environmental remediation is required prior to
leasing, and if historic properties may be affected, the DOS shall, to the
extent practicable, solicit input from the DCHPO and consulting parties
during the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act (CERCLA) decision making process and not under the
NHPA or this PA.
2.
Through the CERCLA process, the DOS shall take remediation
actions necessary to assure protection of human health and the
environment and, when possible, implement measures to avoid, minimize
or mitigate adverse effects on historic properties.

IV.

MITIGATION MEASURES
A.

Development of Marketing Materials
1.
DOS shall develop marketing materials within one year of
execution of this PA that will highlight the historic context of the
WRAMC Historic District and encourages foreign governments to
consider adaptive reuse of Buildings 40 and 41.

B.

Development of Leasing Language
1.
DOS shall incorporate appropriate stipulations of this PA into the
standard real estate instrument it will execute with a foreign government.

C.

WRAMC Interpretive Materials
1.
Within one year of the execution of this PA, the DOS shall initiate
planning, coordination and design for a phased implementation of the
addition of interpretive panels meeting the quality standards of the DC
Heritage Trails program for portions of the FMC that will be accessible to
the public. This work will be coordinated with the work that is being
undertaken on the other areas of the WRAMC. DOS shall fund the design,
production and installation of all interpretive materials that are located
within the FMC.

Page 12 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

520
521
522
523
524
525
526
527
528
529
530
531
532
533
534
535
536
537
538
539
540
541
542
543
544
545
546
547
548
549
550
551
552
553
554
555
556
557
558
559
560
561
562

D.

Public Access to Building 57, The Memorial Chapel
1.
The DOS is actively studying how and when the public can be
provided access to Building 57, Memorial Chapel. When a decision is
reached DOS will enact a public outreach program to inform the public
regarding this opportunity.

V.

POST REVIEW CHANGES TO DOCUMENTS
A.

Master Plan
1.
If DOS proposes a material amendment to the Master Plan that
impacts a historic property at any time, DOS shall initiate consultation by
providing documentation relevant to any such proposed amendment to
consulting parties for their review. Such documentation of a proposed
amendment shall meet the following information requirements:
a)

Detailed description of the proposed change;

b)

Explanation of the justification for the change;

c)
Analysis of potential effects on identified historic
properties;
d)
Description of consultation with other governmental
authorities and interested parties, and copies of formal responses, if
any; and
e)

Analysis of alternatives.

2.
Consulting parties shall have 45 calendar days to review the
proposed amendment to determine whether it may alter, directly or
indirectly, any of the characteristics of a historic property in a manner that
would diminish integrity and to provide comments in writing to DOS.
3.
DOS shall review and take into account written comments prior to
its response to any amendment. Upon approval of an amendment to the
Master Plan, DOS shall provide copies of the amendment within 45
calendar days after approval.

Page 13 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

563
564
565
566
567
568
569
570
571
572
573
574
575
576
577
578
579
580
581
582
583
584
585
586
587
588
589
590
591
592
593
594
595
596
597
598
599
600
601
602
603
604
605
606

B.

Design Guidelines
1.
If DOS proposes a material amendment to the Design Guidelines
that impact a historic property at any time, DOS shall initiate consultation
by providing documentation relevant to any such proposed amendment to
consulting parties for their review. Such documentation of a proposed
amendment shall meet the following information requirements:
a)

Detailed description of the proposed change;

b)

Explanation of the justification for the change;

c)
Analysis of potential effects on identified historic
properties;
d)
Description of consultation with other governmental
authorities and interested parties, and copies of formal responses, if
any; and
e)

Analysis of alternatives.

2.
Consulting parties shall have 45 calendar days to review the
proposed amendment to determine whether it may alter, directly or
indirectly, any of the characteristics of a historic property in a manner that
would diminish integrity and to provide comments in writing to DOS.
3.
DOS shall review and take into account written comments prior to
its response to any amendment. Upon approval of an amendment to the
Design Guidelines, DOS shall provide copies of the amendment within 45
calendar days after approval.
C.
Post-Chancery Development (when a foreign government wants to change
its chancery after initial approval of design)
1.
For any changes that substantially affect the exterior, the foreign
government will follow the same design review and approval process
outlined in the MOA dated February 27, 2017.
D.

Transfer of Lease Between Foreign Governments
1.
Leases of historic properties sold by one government to another
would transfer all stipulations pertaining to the maintenance or future
modifications to the identified historic resource.

Page 14 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

607
608
609
610
611
612
613
614
615
616
617
618
619
620
621
622
623
624
625
626
627
628
629
630
631
632
633
634
635
636
637
638
639
640
641
642
643
644
645
646
647
648
649

VI.

POST REVIEW DISCOVERIES
A.
Non-Native Human Remains and Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act -Related Discoveries. Discovery of human remains shall invoke
the following procedure:
1.
Within 24 hours, the DOS shall implement measures to protect the
human remains from inclement weather and vandalism, and shall notify
the District Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME) and the
DCHPO of the discovery. Sufficient description of the discovery shall be
provided to allow OCME to complete its obligations under D.C. Code § 51406 or other applicable law(s).
2.
If the OCME determines that the human remains are not subject to
a criminal investigation by local or federal authorities, the DOS shall
determine appropriate disposition in consultation with the DCHPO. The
DOS shall comply with all applicable federal laws and regulations.
3.
The Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (25
U.S.C. § 3001 et seq), 43 CFR Part 10 shall apply if human remains and
any associated or unassociated funerary objects, sacred objects or objects
of cultural patrimony are identified as Native American if such are
encountered before the lease of any parcel to a foreign government.
B.
Unanticipated Discoveries. In the event of post-review discovery of
historic properties or adverse effects prior to lease of any parcel to a foreign
government, work shall immediately stop in the area of discovery and the DOS
shall comply with 36 CFR § 800.13(b)(3). The DCHPO shall be notified
immediately and identification and evaluation of the resource shall be undertaken
by the DOS in consultation with the DCHPO.

VII.

ANNUAL REPORT
A.
DOS shall provide a status report to consulting parties, except the ACHP,
to review implementation of the terms of this PA one year after the execution of
this PA and annually every year following until the build-out of the FMC is
completed.
B.
Status reports shall include, at a minimum: a list of every historic property
remaining not leased, the current condition of each property, and a description of
any changes to the property’s condition that have occurred over the reporting
period.

Page 15 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

650
651
652
653
654
655
656
657
658
659
660
661
662
663
664
665
666
667
668
669
670
671
672
673
674
675
676
677
678
679
680
681
682
683
684
685
686
687
688
689
690
691
692
693

C.
This information may be submitted in tabular format. Alternatively, an
annual meeting may occur to review implementation of the terms of this PA and
to determine whether amendments are needed, and will serve in lieu of an annual
report if requested by the DOS or the DCHPO.
VIII. DISPUTE RESOLUTION
A.
Should any Signatory to this PA object at any time to any actions
proposed or the manner in which the terms of this PA are implemented, DOS
shall consult with such party to resolve the objection. If DOS determines that such
objection cannot be resolved, DOS will:
1.
Forward all documentation relevant to the dispute, including the
DOS’s proposed resolution, to the ACHP. The ACHP shall provide DOS
with its advice on the resolution of the objection within 30 calendar days
of receiving adequate documentation. Prior to reaching a final decision on
the dispute, DOS shall prepare a written response that takes into account
any timely advice or comments regarding the dispute from the ACHP and
the consulting parties, and provide them with a copy of this written
response. DOS will then proceed according to its final decision.
2.
If the ACHP does not provide its advice regarding the dispute
within the 30 calendar day time period, DOS may make a final decision on
the dispute and proceed accordingly. Prior to reaching such a final
decision, DOS shall prepare a written response that takes into account any
timely comments regarding the dispute from the consulting parties to the
PA, and provide them and the ACHP with a copy of such written
response.
B.
DOS's responsibility to carry out all other actions subject to the terms of
this PA that are not the subject of the dispute remain unchanged.
C.

Should any member of the public raise a timely and substantive objection
pertaining to the manner in which terms of this Agreement are carried out,
at any time during its implementation, the DOS shall take the objection
into account by consulting with the objector to resolve the objection.
When the DOS responds to an objection, it shall notify the consulting
parties of the objection and the manner in which it was resolved. The DOS
may request the assistance of a consulting party to resolve an objection.

Page 16 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

694
695
696
697
698
699
700
701
702
703
704
705
706
707
708
709
710
711
712
713
714
715
716
717
718
719
720
721
722
723
724
725
726
727
728
729
730
731
732
733
734

IX.

AMENDMENT
A.
This PA may be amended when such an amendment is agreed to in writing
by all Signatories. The amendment will be effective on the date a copy signed by
all of the Signatories is filed with the ACHP.

X.

TERMINATION
A.
If any signatory to this PA determines that its terms will not or cannot be
carried out, that party shall immediately consult with the other parties to attempt
to develop an amendment per Stipulation IX, above. If within 30 calendar days
(or another time period agreed to by all signatories) an amendment cannot be
reached, any signatory may terminate the PA upon written notification to the
other signatories.
B.
Once the PA is terminated, and prior to work continuing on the
undertaking, DOS must either (a) execute a Memorandum of Agreement pursuant
to 36 CFR § 800.6, or (b) request, take into account, and respond to the comments
of the ACHP under 36 CFR § 800.7. DOS shall notify the signatories as to the
course of action it will pursue.

XI.

ANTI-DEFICIENCY ACT
The Department of State’s obligations under this PA are subject to the availability
of appropriated funds, and the stipulations of this PA are subject to the provisions
of the Anti-Deficiency Act. The Department of State will make reasonable and
good faith efforts to secure the necessary funds to implement this PA in its
entirety. If compliance with the Anti-Deficiency Act alters or impairs the
Department of State’s ability to implement the stipulations of this PA, the
Department of State will consult in accordance with the amendment and
terminations procedures found in Stipulations IX and X of this PA.

XII.

DURATION
A.
This PA shall remain in full force and effect for 20 years after the date of
the last signatory’s signature.
B.
This PA shall be reviewed periodically by the signatories, not more than
on an annual basis and not less than every five years from the execution of the
PA.

Page 17 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

735
736
737
738
739
740
741

C.
One year prior to the date this PA would otherwise expire, DOS shall
consult with the signatories to determine whether the PA needs to be extended,
amended, or terminated and take such actions as appropriate.
EXECUTION of this PA by the DOS, DCHPO, NCPC, and the ACHP and
implementation of its terms evidence that DOS has taken into account the effects of this
undertaking on historic properties and afforded the ACHP an opportunity to comment.

Page 18 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of State,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office,
the National Capital Planning Commission, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Development, Implementation, and Maintenance of a
Foreign Missions Center
Within the Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District
Washington, District of Columbia
SIGNATORY:
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
___________________________________
[NAME], [TITLE]

Date: ________________

Page 19 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of State,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office,
the National Capital Planning Commission, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Development, Implementation, and Maintenance of a
Foreign Missions Center
Within the Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District
Washington, District of Columbia
SIGNATORY:
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICE
___________________________________

Date: ________________

Mr. David Maloney, State Historic Preservation Officer

Page 20 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of State,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office,
National Capital Planning Commission, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Development, Implementation, and Maintenance of a
Foreign Missions Center
Within the Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District
Washington, District of Columbia
SIGNATORY:
ADVISORY COUNCIL ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
___________________________________
John M. Fowler, Executive Director

Date: ________________

Page 21 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of State,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office,
the National Capital Planning Commission, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Development, Implementation, and Maintenance of a
Foreign Missions Center
Within the Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District
Washington, District of Columbia
INVITED SIGNATORY:
NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION
___________________________________
[NAME], [TITLE]

Date: ________________

Page 22 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

Programmatic Agreement
Among the
Department of State,
The District of Columbia State Historic Preservation Office,
the National Capital Planning Commission, and
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Regarding the Development, Implementation, and Maintenance of a
Foreign Missions Center
Within the Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District
Washington, District of Columbia
CONCURRING PARTY:
ADDITIONAL CONCURRING PARTIES TO BE ADDED AFTER REVIEW BY ALL
CONSULTING PARTIES

Page 23 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix 1: Map showing Area of Potential Effect for Historic Resources
Appendix 2: Map showing Historic Resources within the Walter Reed Army
Medical Center Historic District
Appendix 3: Memorandum of Agreement Between the National Capital Planning
Commission and the United States Department of State, Office of Foreign Missions
Regarding the Review of Chancery Development at the Foreign Missions Center,
dated February 27, 2017

Page 24 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

APPENDIX 1: Area of Potential Effect for Historic Resources

Page 25 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

APPENDIX 2: Walter Reed Army Medical Center Historic District Historic
Resources

Page 26 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

Appendix 3: Memorandum of Agreement Between the National Capital Planning
Commission and the United States Department of State, Office of Foreign Missions
Regarding the Review of Chancery Development at the Foreign Missions Center,
dated February 27, 2017

Page 27 of 27
DOS Foreign Missions Center Programmatic Agreement
Third Draft- 27 July 2017

